# Section 4

and burdens, especially for vulnerable countries and communities. {WGIII SPM D.3, WGIII SPM D.3.2, WGIII SPM D.3.3, WGIII SPM D.3.4, WGIII TS Box TS.4}

Development priorities among countries also reflect different starting points and contexts, and enabling conditions for shifting development pathways towards increased sustainability will therefore differ, giving rise to different needs (high confidence). Implementing just transition principles through collective and participatory decision-making processes is an effective way of integrating equity principles into policies at all scales depending on national circumstances, while in several countries just transition commissions, task forces and national policies have been established (medium confidence). {WGIII SPM D.3.1, WGIII SPM D.3.3}

Many economic and regulatory instruments have been effective in reducing emissions and practical experience has informed instrument design to improve them while addressing distributional goals and social acceptance (high confidence). The design of behavioural interventions, including the way that choices are presented to consumers work synergistically with price signals, making the combination more effective (medium confidence). Individuals with high socio-economic status contribute disproportionately to emissions, and have the highest potential for emissions reductions, e.g., as citizens, investors, consumers, role models, and professionals (high confidence). There are options on design of instruments such as taxes, subsidies, prices, and consumption-based approaches, complemented by regulatory instruments to reduce high-emissions consumption while improving equity and societal well-being (high confidence). Behaviour and lifestyle changes to help end-users adopt low-GHG-intensive options can be supported by policies, infrastructure and technology with multiple co-benefits for societal well-being (high confidence). Broadening equitable access to domestic and international finance, technologies and capacity can also act as a catalyst for accelerating mitigation and shifting development pathways in low-income contexts (high confidence). Eradicating extreme poverty, energy poverty, and providing decent living standards to all in these regions in the context of achieving sustainable development objectives, in the near term, can be achieved without significant global emissions growth (high confidence). Technology development, transfer, capacity building and financing can support developing countries/ regions leapfrogging or transitioning to low-emissions transport systems thereby providing multiple co-benefits (high confidence). Climate resilient development is advanced when actors work in equitable, just and enabling ways to reconcile divergent interests, values and worldviews, toward equitable and just outcomes (high confidence). {WGII D.2.1, WGIII SPM B.3.3, WGIII SPM.C.8.5, WGIII SPM C.10.2, WGIII SPM C.10.4, WGIII SPM D.3.4, WGIII SPM E.4.2, WGIII TS.5.1, WGIII 5.4, WGIII 5.8, WGIII 15.2}

# 4.5 Near-Term Mitigation and Adaptation Actions

Rapid and far-reaching transitions across all sectors and systems are necessary to achieve deep and sustained emissions reductions and secure a liveable and sustainable future for all. These system transitions involve a significant upscaling of a wide portfolio of mitigation and adaptation options. Feasible, effective and low-cost options for mitigation and adaptation are already available, with differences across systems and regions. (high confidence)

Rapid and far-reaching transitions across all sectors and systems are necessary to achieve deep emissions reductions and secure a liveable and sustainable future for all (high confidence). System transitions151 consistent with pathways that limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 5 0 \% )$ with no or limited overshoot are more rapid and pronounced in the near-term than in those that limit warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ (high confidence). Such a systemic change is unprecedented in terms of scale, but not necessarily in terms of speed (medium confidence). The system transitions make possible the transformative adaptation required for high levels of human health and well-being, economic and social resilience, ecosystem health, and planetary health. {WGII SPM A, WGII Figure SPM.1; WGIII SPM C.3; SR1.5 SPM C.2, SR1.5 SPM C.2.1, SR1.5 SPM C.2, SR1.5 SPM C.5}

Feasible, effective and low-cost options for mitigation and adaptation are already available (high confidence) (Figure 4.4). Mitigation options costing USD 100 $\mathsf { t C O } _ { 2 }  – \mathsf { e q } ^ { - 1 }$ or less could reduce global GHG emissions by at least half the 2019 level by 2030 (options costing less than USD $2 0 \uparrow 0 \uparrow 2 0 _ { 2 } – \Theta \mathsf { q } ^ { - 1 }$ are estimated to make up more than half of this potential) (high confidence) (Figure 4.4). The availability, feasibility152 and potential of mitigation or effectiveness of adaptation options in the near term differ across systems and regions (very high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2; WGIII SPM C.12, WGIII SPM E.1.1; SR1.5 SPM B.6}

Demand-side measures and new ways of end-use service provision can reduce global GHG emissions in end-use sectors by 40 to $70 \%$ by 2050 compared to baseline scenarios, while some regions and socioeconomic groups require additional energy and resources. Demand-side mitigation encompasses changes in infrastructure use, end-use technology adoption, and socio-cultural and behavioural change. (high confidence) (Figure 4.4). {WGIII SPM C.10}