# Adaptation Options and their Limits in a Warmer World

B.4 Adaptation options that are feasible and effective today will become constrained and less effective with increasing global warming. With increasing global warming, losses and damages will increase and additional human and natural systems will reach adaptation limits. Maladaptation can be avoided by flexible, multi-sectoral, inclusive, long-term planning and implementation of adaptation actions, with co-benefits to many sectors and systems. (high confidence) {3.2, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3}

B.4.1 The effectiveness of adaptation, including ecosystem-based and most water-related options, will decrease with increasing warming. The feasibility and effectiveness of options increase with integrated, multi-sectoral solutions that differentiate responses based on climate risk, cut across systems and address social inequities. As adaptation options often have long implementation times, long-term planning increases their efficiency. (high confidence) {3.2, Figure 3.4, 4.1, 4.2}

B.4.2 With additional global warming, limits to adaptation and losses and damages, strongly concentrated among vulnerable populations, will become increasingly difficult to avoid (high confidence). Above $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ of global warming, limited freshwater resources pose potential hard adaptation limits for small islands and for regions dependent on glacier and snow melt (medium confidence). Above that level, ecosystems such as some warm-water coral reefs, coastal wetlands, rainforests, and polar and mountain ecosystems will have reached or surpassed hard adaptation limits and as a consequence, some Ecosystem-based Adaptation measures will also lose their effectiveness (high confidence). {2.3.2, 3.2, 4.3}

B.4.3 Actions that focus on sectors and risks in isolation and on short-term gains often lead to maladaptation over the long term, creating lock-ins of vulnerability, exposure and risks that are difficult to change. For example, seawalls effectively reduce impacts to people and assets in the short term but can also result in lock-ins and increase exposure to climate risks in the long term unless they are integrated into a long-term adaptive plan. Maladaptive responses can worsen existing inequities especially for Indigenous Peoples and marginalised groups and decrease ecosystem and biodiversity resilience. Maladaptation can be avoided by flexible, multi-sectoral, inclusive, long-term planning and implementation of adaptation actions, with co-benefits to many sectors and systems. (high confidence) {2.3.2, 3.2}

# Carbon Budgets and Net Zero Emissions

B.5 Limiting human-caused global warming requires net zero $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions. Cumulative carbon emissions until the time of reaching net zero $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions and the level of greenhouse gas emission reductions this decade largely determine whether warming can be limited to $\bar { 1 } . 5 \textdegree C$ or ${ \sf z } ^ { \circ } { \sf C }$ (high confidence). Projected $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions from existing fossil fuel infrastructure without additional abatement would exceed the remaining carbon budget for $1 . 5 \textdegree$ $( 5 0 \% )$ (high confidence). {2.3, 3.1, 3.3, Table 3.1}

B.5.1 From a physical science perspective, limiting human-caused global warming to a specific level requires limiting cumulative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions, reaching at least net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions, along with strong reductions in other greenhouse gas emissions. Reaching net zero GHG emissions primarily requires deep reductions in $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 } ,$ methane, and other GHG emissions, and implies net negative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions39. Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) will be necessary to achieve net negative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions (see B.6). Net zero GHG emissions, if sustained, are projected to result in a gradual decline in global surface temperatures after an earlier peak. (high confidence) {3.1.1, 3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, Table 3.1, Cross-Section Box.1}

B.5.2 For every $1 0 0 0 \mathsf { G t C } 0 _ { 2 }$ emitted by human activity, global surface temperature rises by $0 . 4 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ (best estimate, with a likely range from $0 . 2 7 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ to $0 . 6 3 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } )$ . The best estimates of the remaining carbon budgets from the beginning of 2020 are $5 0 0 \mathsf { G r } \mathsf { C } 0 _ { 2 }$ for a $50 \%$ likelihood of limiting global warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ and $1 1 5 0 \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 }$ for a $67 \%$ likelihood of limiting warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ^ { 4 0 }$ . The stronger the reductions in non- ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions, the lower the resulting temperatures are for a given remaining carbon budget or the larger remaining carbon budget for the same level of temperature change41. {3.3.1}