At least $1 . 8 \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq yr–1 of avoided emissions can be accounted for by aggregating separate estimates for the effects of economic and regulatory instruments (medium confidence). Growing numbers of laws and executive orders have impacted global emissions and are estimated to have resulted in $5 . 9 \ G t C 0 _ { 2 }$ -eq yr–1 of avoided emissions in 2016 (medium confidence). These reductions have only partly offset global emissions growth (high confidence). {WGIII SPM B.1, WGIII SPM B.2.4, WGIII SPM B.3.5, WGIII SPM B.5.1, WGIII SPM B.5.3, WGIII 1.3.2, WGIII 2.2.3}

# 2.2.3. Adaptation Actions to Date

Progress in adaptation planning and implementation has been observed across all sectors and regions, generating multiple benefits (very high confidence). The ambition, scope and progress on adaptation have risen among governments at the local, national and international levels, along with businesses, communities and civil society (high confidence). Various tools, measures and processes are available that can enable, accelerate and sustain adaptation implementation (high confidence). Growing public and political awareness of climate impacts and risks has resulted in at least 170 countries and many cities including adaptation in their climate policies and planning processes (high confidence). Decision support tools and climate services are increasingly being used (very high confidence) and pilot projects and local experiments are being implemented in different sectors (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.1, WGII SPM.C.1.1, WGII TS.D.1.3, WGII TS.D.10}

Adaptation to water-related risks and impacts make up the majority $( \sim 6 0 \% )$ of all documented83 adaptation (high confidence). A large number of these adaptation responses are in the agriculture sector and these include on-farm water management, water storage, soil moisture conservation, and irrigation. Other adaptations in agriculture include cultivar improvements, agroforestry, community-based adaptation and farm and landscape diversification among others (high confidence). For inland flooding, combinations of non-structural measures like early warning systems, enhancing natural water retention such as by restoring wetlands and rivers, and land use planning such as no build zones or upstream forest management, can reduce flood risk (medium confidence). Some land-related adaptation actions such as sustainable food production, improved and sustainable forest management, soil organic carbon management, ecosystem conservation and land restoration, reduced deforestation and degradation, and reduced food loss and waste are being undertaken, and can have mitigation co-benefits (high confidence). Adaptation actions that increase the resilience of biodiversity and ecosystem services to climate change include responses like minimising additional stresses or disturbances, reducing fragmentation, increasing natural habitat extent, connectivity and heterogeneity, and protecting small-scale refugia where microclimate conditions can allow species to persist (high confidence). Most innovations in urban adaptation have occurred through advances in disaster risk management, social safety nets and green/blue infrastructure (medium confidence). Many adaptation measures that benefit health and well-being are found in other sectors (e.g., food, livelihoods, social protection, water and sanitation, infrastructure) (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2.1, WGII SPM C.2.2, WGII TS.D.1.2, WGII TS.D.1.4, WGII TS.D.4.2, WGII TS.D.8.3, WGII 4 ES; SRCCL SPM B.1.1}

Adaptation can generate multiple additional benefits such as improving agricultural productivity, innovation, health and well-being, food security, livelihood, and biodiversity conservation as well as reduction of risks and damages (very high confidence). {WGII SPM C1.1}

Globally tracked adaptation finance has shown an upward trend since AR5, but represents only a small portion of total climate finance, is uneven and has developed heterogeneously across regions and sectors (high confidence). Adaptation finance has come predominantly from public sources, largely through grants, concessional and non-concessional instruments (very high confidence). Globally, private-sector financing of adaptation from a variety of sources such as commercial financial institutions, institutional investors, other private equity, non-financial corporations, as well as communities and households has been limited, especially in developing countries (high confidence). Public mechanisms and finance can leverage private sector finance for adaptation by addressing real and perceived regulatory, cost and market barriers, for example via public-private partnerships (high confidence). Innovations in adaptation and resilience finance, such as forecast-based/anticipatory financing systems and regional risk insurance pools, have been piloted and are growing in scale (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.3.2, WGII SPM C.5.4; WGII TS.D.1.6, WGII Cross-Chapter Box FINANCE; WGIII SPM E.5.4}

There are adaptation options which are effective84 in reducing climate risks85 for specific contexts, sectors and regions and contribute positively to sustainable development and other societal goals. In the agriculture sector, cultivar improvements, on-farm water management and storage, soil moisture conservation, irrigation86, agroforestry, community-based adaptation, and farm and landscape level diversification, and sustainable land management approaches, provide multiple benefits and reduce climate risks. Reduction of food loss and waste, and adaptation measures in support of balanced diets contribute to nutrition, health, and biodiversity benefits. (high confidence) {WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.2.1, WGII SPM C.2.2; SRCCL B.2, SRCCL SPM C.2.1}

Ecosystem-based Adaptation87 approaches such as urban greening, restoration of wetlands and upstream forest ecosystems reduce a range of climate change risks, including flood risks, urban heat and provide multiple co-benefits. Some land-based adaptation options provide immediate benefits (e.g., conservation of peatlands,