# Section 3

# 3.3 Mitigation Pathways

Limiting human-caused global warming requires net zero anthropogenic $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions. Pathways consistent with $1 . 5 \textdegree$ and ${ \sf z } ^ { \circ } { \sf C }$ carbon budgets imply rapid, deep, and in most cases immediate GHG emission reductions in all sectors (high confidence). Exceeding a warming level and returning (i.e. overshoot) implies increased risks and potential irreversible impacts; achieving and sustaining global net negative $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions would reduce warming (high confidence).

# 3.3.1 Remaining Carbon Budgets

Limiting global temperature increase to a specific level requires limiting cumulative net ${ \bf { \bar { C } } } { \bf { 0 } } _ { 2 }$ emissions to within a finite carbon budget126, along with strong reductions in other GHGs. For every $1 0 0 0 \mathsf { G t C } 0 _ { 2 }$ emitted by human activity, global mean temperature rises by likely $0 . 2 7 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ to $0 . 6 3 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ (best estimate of $0 . 4 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } )$ ). This relationship implies that there is a finite carbon budget that cannot be exceeded in order to limit warming to any given level. {WGI SPM D.1, WGI SPM D.1.1; SR1.5 SPM C.1.3} (Figure 3.5)

The best estimates of the remaining carbon budget (RCB) from the beginning of 2020 for limiting warming to $1 . 5 \%$ with a $50 \%$ likelihood127 is estimated to be $5 0 0 { \mathsf { G t C } } 0 _ { 2 } ;$ for ${ \displaystyle 2 ^ { \circ } } \mathbb { C }$ $6 7 \%$ likelihood) this is $1 1 5 0 \mathsf { G t C } 0 _ { 2 }$ . 128 Remaining carbon budgets have been quantified based on the assessed value of TCRE and its uncertainty, estimates of historical warming, climate system feedbacks such as emissions from thawing permafrost, and the global surface temperature change after global anthropogenic ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions reach net zero, as well as variations in projected warming from non- $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions due in part to mitigation action. The stronger the reductions in non- $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions the lower the resulting temperatures are for a given RCB or the larger RCB for the same level of temperature change. For instance, the RCB for limiting warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ with a $50 \%$ likelihood could vary between 300 to $6 0 0 \mathsf { G r C } 0 _ { 2 }$ depending on non- $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 }$ warming129. Limiting warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ with a $67 \%$ (or $8 3 \%$ ) likelihood would imply a RCB of 1150 (900) $\mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 }$ from the beginning of 2020. To stay below $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ with a $50 \%$ likelihood, the RCB is higher, i.e., $1 3 5 0 \mathsf { G r C O } _ { 2 } ^ { 1 3 0 }$ . {WGI SPM D.1.2, WGI Table SPM.2; WGIII Box SPM.1, WGIII Box 3.4; SR1.5 SPM C.1.3}

If the annual ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions between 2020–2030 stayed, on average, at the same level as 2019, the resulting cumulative emissions would almost exhaust the remaining carbon budget for $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( 5 0 \% )$ , and exhaust more than a third of the remaining carbon budget for $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( 6 7 \% )$ (Figure 3.5). Based on central estimates only, historical cumulative net ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions between 1850 and 2019 $( 2 4 0 0 \pm 2 4 0 \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 } )$ amount to about four-fifths131 of the total carbon budget for a $50 \%$ probability of limiting global warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ (central estimate about $2 9 0 0 { \mathsf { G t C } } 0 _ { 2 }$ ) and to about two-thirds132 of the total carbon budget for a $67 \%$ probability to limit global warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ (central estimate about $3 5 5 0 \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 } )$ . {WGI Table SPM.2; WGIII SPM B.1.3, WGIII Table 2.1}

In scenarios with increasing ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions, the land and ocean carbon sinks are projected to be less effective at slowing the accumulation of $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ in the atmosphere (high confidence). While natural land and ocean carbon sinks are projected to take up, in absolute terms, a progressively larger amount of ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ under higher compared to lower ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions scenarios, they become less effective, that is, the proportion of emissions taken up by land and ocean decreases with increasing cumulative net ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions (high confidence). Additional ecosystem responses to warming not yet fully included in climate models, such as GHG fluxes from wetlands, permafrost thaw, and wildfires, would further increase concentrations of these gases in the atmosphere (high confidence). In scenarios where ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ concentrations peak and decline during the 21st century, the land and ocean begin to take up less carbon in response to declining atmospheric ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ concentrations (high confidence) and turn into a weak net source by 2100 in the very low GHG emissions scenario (medium confidence) 133. {WGI SPM B.4, WGI SPM B.4.1, WGI SPM B.4.2, WGI SPM B.4.3}