from zero or low-carbon sources in 2050, such as renewables or fossil fuels with ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ capture and storage, combined with increased electrification of energy demand. Such pathways meet energy service demand with relatively low energy use, through e.g., enhanced energy efficiency and behavioural changes and increased electrification of energy end use. Modelled global pathways limiting global warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 5 0 \% )$ with no or limited overshoot generally implement such changes faster than pathways limiting global warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ (high confidence) {WGIII SPM C.3, WGIII SPM C.3.2, WGIII SPM C.4, WGIII TS.4.2; SR1.5 SPM C.2.2}

AFOLU mitigation options, when sustainably implemented, can deliver large-scale GHG emission reductions and enhanced $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 }$ removal; however, barriers to implementation and trade-offs may result from the impacts of climate change, competing demands on land, conflicts with food security and livelihoods, the complexity of land ownership and management systems, and cultural aspects (see 3.4.1). All assessed modelled pathways that limit warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } \ ( { > } 6 7 \% )$ or lower by 2100 include land-based mitigation and land-use change, with most including different combinations of reforestation, afforestation, reduced deforestation, and bioenergy. However, accumulated carbon in vegetation and soils is at risk from future loss (or sink reversal) triggered by climate change and disturbances such as flood, drought, fire, or pest outbreaks, or future poor management. (high confidence) {WGI SPM B.4.3; WGII SPM B.2.3, WGII SPM B.5.4; WGIII SPM C.9, WGIII SPM C.11.3, WGIII SPM D.2.3, WGIII TS.4.2, 3.4; SR1.5 SPM C.2.5; SRCCL SPM B.1.4, SRCCL SPM B.3, SRCCL SPM B.7}

In addition to deep, rapid, and sustained emission reductions, CDR can fulfil three complementary roles: lowering net $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ or net GHG emissions in the near term; counterbalancing ‘hard-to-abate’ residual emissions (e.g., some emissions from agriculture, aviation, shipping, industrial processes) to help reach net zero $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ or GHG emissions, and achieving net negative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ or GHG emissions if deployed at levels exceeding annual residual emissions (high confidence). CDR methods vary in terms of their maturity, removal process, time scale of carbon storage, storage medium, mitigation potential, cost, co-benefits, impacts and risks, and governance requirements (high confidence). Specifically, maturity ranges from lower maturity (e.g., ocean alkalinisation) to higher maturity (e.g., reforestation); removal and storage potential ranges from lower potential $\cdot < 1$ Gt ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ yr-1, e.g., blue carbon management) to higher potential $( > 3 \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 } \mathsf { y r }$ 1, e.g., agroforestry); costs range from lower cost (e.g., $- 4 5$ to 100 USD $\mathrm { t C O } _ { 2 } ^ { - 1 }$ for soil carbon sequestration) to higher cost (e.g., 100 to 300 USD $\mathrm { t C O } _ { 2 } { } ^ { - 1 }$ for direct air carbon dioxide capture and storage) (medium confidence). Estimated storage timescales vary from decades to centuries for methods that store carbon in vegetation and through soil carbon management, to ten thousand years or more for methods that store carbon in geological formations (high confidence). Afforestation, reforestation, improved forest management, agroforestry and soil carbon sequestration are currently the only widely practiced CDR methods (high confidence). Methods and levels of CDR deployment in global modelled mitigation pathways vary depending on assumptions about costs, availability and constraints (high confidence). {WGIII SPM C.3.5, WGIII SPM C.11.1, WGIII SPM C.11.4}

# 3.3.4 Overshoot Pathways: Increased Risks and Other Implications

Exceeding a specific remaining carbon budget results in higher global warming. Achieving and sustaining net negative global ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions could reverse the resulting temperature exceedance (high confidence). Continued reductions in emissions of short-lived climate forcers, particularly methane, after peak temperature has been reached, would also further reduce warming (high confidence). Only a small number of the most ambitious global modelled pathways limit global warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } \left( > 5 0 \% \right)$ without overshoot. {WGI SPM D.1.1, WGI SPM D.1.6, WGI SPM D.1.7; WGIII TS.4.2}

Overshoot of a warming level results in more adverse impacts, some irreversible, and additional risks for human and natural systems compared to staying below that warming level, with risks growing with the magnitude and duration of overshoot (high confidence). Compared to pathways without overshoot, societies and ecosystems would be exposed to greater and more widespread changes in climatic impact-drivers, such as extreme heat and extreme precipitation, with increasing risks to infrastructure, low-lying coastal settlements, and associated livelihoods (high confidence). Overshooting $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ will result in irreversible adverse impacts on certain ecosystems with low resilience, such as polar, mountain, and coastal ecosystems, impacted by ice-sheet melt, glacier melt, or by accelerating and higher committed sea level rise (high confidence). Overshoot increases the risks of severe impacts, such as increased wildfires, mass mortality of trees, drying of peatlands, thawing of permafrost and weakening natural land carbon sinks; such impacts could increase releases of GHGs making temperature reversal more challenging (medium confidence). {WGI SPM C.2, WGI SPM C.2.1, WGI SPM C.2.3; WGII SPM B.6, WGII SPM B.6.1, WGII SPM B.6.2; SR1.5 3.6}

The larger the overshoot, the more net negative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions needed to return to a given warming level (high confidence). Reducing global temperature by removing ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ would require net negative emissions of $2 2 0 \ { \mathsf { G r C } } { \mathsf { O } } _ { 2 }$ (best estimate, with a likely range of 160 to $3 7 0 \ \mathsf { G r C O } _ { 2 } )$ for every tenth of a degree (medium confidence). Modelled pathways that limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } \left( > 5 0 \% \right)$ with no or limited overshoot reach median values of cumulative net negative emissions of $2 2 0 \ { \mathsf { G r C } } 0 _ { 2 }$ by 2100, pathways that return warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 5 0 \% )$ after high overshoot reach median values of $3 6 0 \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 }$ (high confidence).137 More rapid reduction in ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ and non- $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions, particularly methane, limits peak warming levels and reduces the requirement for net negative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions and CDR, thereby reducing feasibility and sustainability concerns, and social and environmental risks (high confidence). {WGI SPM D.1.1; WGIII SPM B.6.4, WGIII SPM C.2, WGIII SPM C.2.2, WGIII Table SPM.2}