# Section 4

in WGIII Figure SPM.8 under Urban systems, under Buildings and under Transport and adaptation options listed in WGII Figure SPM.4b under Urban and infrastructure systems. Land system comprises mitigation options listed in WGIII Figure SPM.8 under AFOLU and adaptation options listed in WGII Figure SPM.4b under Land and ocean systems: forest-based adaptation, agroforestry, biodiversity management and ecosystem connectivity, improved cropland management, efficient livestock management, water use efficiency and water resource management. Ocean ecosystems comprises adaptation options listed in WGII Figure SPM.4b under Land and ocean systems: coastal defence and hardening, integrated coastal zone management and sustainable aquaculture and fisheries. Society, livelihood and economies comprises adaptation options listed in WGII Figure SPM.4b under Crosssectoral; Industry comprises all those mitigation options listed in WGIII Figure SPM.8 under Industry. SDG 13 (Climate Action) is not listed because mitigation/ adaptation is being considered in terms of interaction with SDGs and not vice versa (SPM SR1.5 Figure SPM.4 caption). The bars denote the strength of the connection and do not consider the strength of the impact on the SDGs. The synergies and trade-offs differ depending on the context and the scale of implementation. Scale of implementation particularly matters when there is competition for scarce resources. For the sake of uniformity, we are not reporting the confidence levels because there is knowledge gap in adaptation option wise relation with SDGs and their confidence level which is evident from WGII fig SPM.4b. {WGII Figure SPM.4b; WGIII Figure SPM.8}

# 4.7 Governance and Policy for Near-Term Climate Change Action

Effective climate action requires political commitment, well-aligned multi-level governance and institutional frameworks, laws, policies and strategies. It needs clear goals, adequate finance and financing tools, coordination across multiple policy domains, and inclusive governance processes. Many mitigation and adaptation policy instruments have been deployed successfully, and could support deep emissions reductions and climate resilience if scaled up and applied widely, depending on national circumstances. Adaptation and mitigation action benefits from drawing on diverse knowledge. (high confidence)

Effective climate governance enables mitigation and adaptation by providing overall direction based on national circumstances, setting targets and priorities, mainstreaming climate action across policy domains and levels, based on national circumstances and in the context of international cooperation. Effective governance enhances monitoring and evaluation and regulatory certainty, prioritising inclusive, transparent and equitable decision-making, and improves access to finance and technology (high confidence). These functions can be promoted by climate-relevant laws and plans, which are growing in number across sectors and regions, advancing mitigation outcomes and adaptation benefits (high confidence). Climate laws have been growing in number and have helped deliver mitigation and adaptation outcomes (medium confidence). {WGII SPM C.5, WGII SPM C.5.1, WGII SPM C5.4, WGII SPM C.5.6; WGIII SPM B.5.2, WGIII SPM E.3.1}

Effective municipal, national and sub-national climate institutions, such as expert and co-ordinating bodies, enable co-produced, multi-scale decision-processes, build consensus for action among diverse interests, and inform strategy settings (high confidence). This requires adequate institutional capacity at all levels (high confidence). Vulnerabilities and climate risks are often reduced through carefully designed and implemented laws, policies, participatory processes, and interventions that address context specific inequities such as based on gender, ethnicity, disability, age, location and income (high confidence). Policy support is influenced by Indigenous Peoples, businesses, and actors in civil society, including, youth, labour, media, and local communities, and effectiveness is enhanced by partnerships between many different groups in society (high confidence). Climate-related litigation is growing, with a large number of cases in some developed countries and with a much smaller number in some developing countries, and in some cases has influenced the outcome and ambition of climate governance (medium confidence). {WGII SPM C2.6, WGII SPM C.5.2, WGII SPM C.5.5, WGII SPM C.5.6, WGII SPM D.3.1; WGIII SPM E3.2, WGIII SPM E.3.3}

Effective climate governance is enabled by inclusive decision processes, allocation of appropriate resources, and institutional review, monitoring and evaluation (high confidence). Multi-level, hybrid and cross-sector governance facilitates appropriate consideration for co-benefits and trade-offs, particularly in land sectors where decision processes range from farm level to national scale (high confidence). Consideration of climate justice can help to facilitate shifting development pathways towards sustainability. {WGII SPM C.5.5, WGII SPM C.5.6, WGII SPM D.1.1, WGII SPM D.2, WGII SPM D.3.2; SRCCL SPM C.3, SRCCL TS.1}

Drawing on diverse knowledge and partnerships, including with women, youth, Indigenous Peoples, local communities, and ethnic minorities can facilitate climate resilient development and has allowed locally appropriate and socially acceptable solutions (high confidence). {WGII SPM D.2, D.2.1}

Many regulatory and economic instruments have already been deployed successfully. These instruments could support deep emissions reductions if scaled up and applied more widely. Practical experience has informed instrument design and helped to improve predictability, environmental effectiveness, economic efficiency, and equity. (high confidence) {WGII SPM E.4; WGIII SPM E.4.2}

Scaling up and enhancing the use of regulatory instruments, consistent with national circumstances, can improve mitigation outcomes in sectoral applications (high confidence), and regulatory instruments that include flexibility mechanisms can reduce costs of cutting emissions (medium confidence). {WGII SPM C.5.4; WGIII SPM E.4.1}

Where implemented, carbon pricing instruments have incentivized low-cost emissions reduction measures, but have been less effective, on their own and at prevailing prices during the assessment period, to promote higher-cost measures necessary for further reductions (medium confidence). Revenue from carbon taxes or emissions trading can be used for equity and distributional goals, for example to support low-income households, among other