the global emissions reported in WGIII SPM Section B and WGIII Chapter 2; this ensures internal consistency in assumptions about emission sources and activities, as well as consistency with temperature projections based on the physical climate science assessment by WGI (see WGIII SPM Footnote 49). Negative values (e.g., in C5, C6) represent an increase in emissions. The modelled GHG emissions in 2019 are 55 [53–58] GtCO2-eq, thus within the uncertainty ranges of estimates for 2019 emissions [53-66] GtCO2-eq (see 2.1.1).

4 Emissions milestones are provided for 5-year intervals in order to be consistent with the underlying 5-year time-step data of the modelled pathways. Ranges in square brackets underneath refer to the range across the pathways, comprising the lower bound of the 5th percentile 5-year interval and the upper bound of the 95th percentile 5-year interval. Numbers in round brackets signify the fraction of pathways that reach specific milestones over the 21st century. Percentiles reported across all pathways in that category include those that do not reach net zero before 2100.

5 For cases where models do not report all GHGs, missing GHG species are infilled and aggregated into a Kyoto basket of GHG emissions in ${ \mathsf { C } } { \mathsf { O } } _ { 2 }$ -eq defined by the 100-yea global warming potential. For each pathway, reporting of ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ , CH4, and N2O emissions was the minimum required for the assessment of the climate response and the assignmen to a climate category. Emissions pathways without climate assessment are not included in the ranges presented here. See WGIII Annex III.II.5.

Cumulative emissions are calculated from the start of 2020 to the time of net zero and 2100, respectively. They are based on harmonised net CO2 emissions, ensuring onsistency with the WG I assessment of the remaining carbon budget. {WGIII Box 3.4, WGIII SPM Footnote 50}

# 3.3.2 Net Zero Emissions: Timing and Implications

From a physical science perspective, limiting human-caused global warming to a specific level requires limiting cumulative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions, reaching net zero or net negative ${ \bf { C } } { \bf { 0 } } _ { 2 }$ emissions, along with strong reductions of other GHG emissions (see Cross-Section Box.1). Global modelled pathways that reach and sustain net zero GHG emissions are projected to result in a gradual decline in surface temperature (high confidence). Reaching net zero GHG emissions primarily requires deep reductions in $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 } ,$ methane, and other GHG emissions, and implies net negative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions.134 Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) will be necessary to achieve net negative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions135. Achieving global net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions, with remaining anthropogenic ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions balanced by durably stored ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ from anthropogenic removal, is a requirement to stabilise ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ -induced global surface temperature increase (see 3.3.3) (high confidence). This is different from achieving net zero GHG emissions, where metric-weighted anthropogenic GHG emissions (see Cross-Section Box.1) equal ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ removal (high confidence). Emissions pathways that reach and sustain net zero GHG emissions defined by the 100-year global warming potential imply net negative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions and are projected to result in a gradual decline in surface temperature after an earlier peak (high confidence). While reaching net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ or net zero GHG emissions requires deep and rapid reductions in gross emissions, the deployment of CDR to counterbalance hardto-abate residual emissions (e.g., some emissions from agriculture, aviation, shipping, and industrial processes) is unavoidable (high confidence). {WGI SPM D.1, WGI SPM D.1.1, WGI SPM D.1.8; WGIII SPM C.2, WGIII SPM C.3, WGIII SPM C.11, WGIII Box TS.6; SR1.5 SPM A.2.2}

net zero GHG, counterbalanced by net negative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions. As a result, net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ would be reached before net zero GHGs (high confidence). {WGIII SPM C.2, WGIII SPM C.2.3, WGIII SPM C.2.4, WGIII Table SPM.2, WGIII 3.3} (Figure 3.6)

In modelled pathways, the timing of net zero $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions, followed by net zero GHG emissions, depends on several variables, including the desired climate outcome, the mitigation strategy and the gases covered (high confidence). Global net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions are reached in the early 2050s in pathways that limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 5 0 \% )$ with no or limited overshoot, and around the early 2070s in pathways that limit warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ . While non- $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 }$ GHG emissions are strongly reduced in all pathways that limit warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ or lower, residual emissions of $\mathsf { C H } _ { 4 }$ and ${ \sf N } _ { 2 } 0$ and F-gases of about 8 [5–11] $\mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 } \mathsf { - e q \ y r } ^ { - 1 }$ remain at the time of