# Section 2

# 2.1.2. Observed Climate System Changes and Impacts to Date

It is unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, ocean and land. Widespread and rapid changes in the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and biosphere have occurred (Table 2.1). The scale of recent changes across the climate system as a whole and the present state of many aspects of the climate system are unprecedented over many centuries to many thousands of years. It is very likely that GHG emissions were the main driver74 of tropospheric warming and extremely likely that human-caused stratospheric ozone depletion was the main driver of stratospheric cooling between 1979 and the mid-1990s. It is virtually certain that the global upper ocean (0-700m) has warmed since the 1970s and extremely likely that human influence is the main driver. Ocean warming accounted for $91 \%$ of the heating in the climate system, with land warming, ice loss and atmospheric warming accounting for about $5 \%$ , $3 \%$ and $1 \%$ , respectively (high confidence). Global mean sea level increased by 0.20 [0.15 to 0.25] m between 1901 and 2018. The average rate of sea level rise was 1.3 [0.6 to $2 . 1 ] \mathsf { m m } \mathsf { y r } ^ { 1 }$ between 1901 and 1971, increasing to 1.9 [0.8 to 2.9] mm yr-1 between 1971 and 2006, and further increasing to 3.7 [3.2 to –4.2] mm yr-1 between 2006 and 2018 (high confidence). Human influence was very likely the main driver of these increases since at least 1971 (Figure 3.4). Human influence is very likely the main driver of the global retreat of glaciers since the 1990s and the decrease in Arctic sea ice area between 1979–1988 and 2010–2019. Human influence has also very likely contributed to decreased Northern Hemisphere spring snow cover and surface melting of the Greenland ice sheet. It is virtually certain that human-caused ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions are the main driver of current global acidification of the surface open ocean. {WGI SPM A.1, WGI SPM A.1.3, WGI SPM A.1.5, WGI SPM A.1.6, WG1 SPM A1.7, WGI SPM A.2, WG1.SPM A.4.2; SROCC SPM.A.1, SROCC SPM A.2}

Human-caused climate change is already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region across the globe. Evidence of observed changes in extremes such as heatwaves, heavy precipitation, droughts, and tropical cyclones, and, in particular, their attribution to human influence, has strengthened since AR5 (Figure 2.3). It is virtually certain that hot extremes (including heatwaves) have become more frequent and more intense across most land regions since the 1950s (Figure 2.3), while cold extremes (including cold waves) have become less frequent and less severe, with high confidence that human-caused climate change is the main driver of these changes. Marine heatwaves have approximately doubled in frequency since the 1980s (high confidence), and human influence has very likely contributed to most of them since at least 2006. The frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation events have increased since the 1950s over most land areas for which observational data are sufficient for trend analysis (high confidence), and human-caused climate change is likely the main driver (Figure 2.3). Human-caused climate change has contributed to increases in agricultural and ecological droughts in some regions due to increased land evapotranspiration (medium confidence) (Figure 2.3). It is likely that the global proportion of major (Category 3–5) tropical cyclone occurrence has increased over the last four decades. {WGI SPM A.3, WGI SPM A3.1, WGI SPM A3.2; WGI SPM A3.4; SRCCL SPM.A.2.2; SROCC SPM. A.2}

Climate change has caused substantial damages, and increasingly irreversible75 losses, in terrestrial, freshwater, cryospheric and coastal and open ocean ecosystems (high confidence). The extent and magnitude of climate change impacts are larger than estimated in previous assessments (high confidence). Approximately half of the species assessed globally have shifted polewards or, on land, also to higher elevations (very high confidence). Biological responses including changes in geographic placement and shifting seasonal timing are often not sufficient to cope with recent climate change (very high confidence). Hundreds of local losses of species have been driven by increases in the magnitude of heat extremes (high confidence) and mass mortality events on land and in the ocean (very high confidence). Impacts on some ecosystems are approaching irreversibility such as the impacts of hydrological changes resulting from the retreat of glaciers, or the changes in some mountain (medium confidence) and Arctic ecosystems driven by permafrost thaw (high confidence). Impacts in ecosystems from slow-onset processes such as ocean acidification, sea level rise or regional decreases in precipitation have also been attributed to human-caused climate change (high confidence). Climate change has contributed to desertification and exacerbated land degradation, particularly in low lying coastal areas, river deltas, drylands and in permafrost areas (high confidence). Nearly $50 \%$ of coastal wetlands have been lost over the last 100 years, as a result of the combined effects of localised human pressures, sea level rise, warming and extreme climate events (high confidence). {WGII SPM B.1.1, WGII SPM B.1.2, WGII Figure SPM.2.A, WGII TS.B.1; SRCCL SPM A.1.5, SRCCL SPM A.2, SRCCL SPM A.2.6, SRCCL Figure SPM.1; SROCC SPM A.6.1, SROCC SPM, A.6.4, SROCC SPM A.7}