Section 3

# Section 3: Long-Term Climate and Development Futures

# 3.1 Long-Term Climate Change, Impacts and Related Risks

Future warming will be driven by future emissions and will affect all major climate system components, with every region experiencing multiple and co-occurring changes. Many climate-related risks are assessed to be higher than in previous assessments, and projected long-term impacts are up to multiple times higher than currently observed. Multiple climatic and non-climatic risks will interact, resulting in compounding and cascading risks across sectors and regions. Sea level rise, as well as other irreversible changes, will continue for thousands of years, at rates depending on future emissions. (high confidence)

# 3.1.1. Long-term Climate Change

The uncertainty range on assessed future changes in global surface temperature is narrower than in the AR5. For the first time in an IPCC assessment cycle, multi-model projections of global surface temperature, ocean warming and sea level are constrained using observations and the assessed climate sensitivity. The likely range of equilibrium climate sensitivity has been narrowed to $2 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ to $4 . 0 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ (with a best estimate of $3 . 0 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } )$ ) based on multiple lines of evidence112, including improved understanding of cloud feedbacks. For related emissions scenarios, this leads to narrower uncertainty ranges for long-term projected global temperature change than in AR5. {WGI A.4, WGI Box SPM.1, WGI TS.3.2, WGI 4.3}

Future warming depends on future GHG emissions, with cumulative net $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ dominating. The assessed best estimates and very likely ranges of warming for 2081-2100 with respect to 1850–1900 vary from 1.4 [1.0 to $1 . 8 ] ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ in the very low GHG emissions scenario (SSP1-1.9) to 2.7 [2.1 to $3 . 5 ] ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ in the intermediate GHG emissions scenario (SSP2-4.5) and 4.4 [3.3 to $5 . 7 ] ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ in the very high GHG emissions scenario (SSP5-8.5)113. {WGI SPM B.1.1, WGI Table SPM.1, WGI Figure SPM.4} (Cross-Section Box.2 Figure 1)

Modelled pathways consistent with the continuation of policies implemented by the end of 2020 lead to global warming of 3.2 [2.2 to $3 . 5 ] ^ { \circ } 0$ $( 5 - 9 5 \%$ range) by 2100 (medium confidence) (see also Section 2.3.1). Pathways of ${ > } 4 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( \ge 5 0 \% )$ by 2100 would imply a reversal of current technology and/or mitigation policy trends (medium confidence). However, such warming could occur in emissions pathways consistent with policies implemented by the end of 2020 if climate sensitivity or carbon cycle feedbacks are higher than the best estimate (high confidence). {WGIII SPM C.1.3}

Global warming will continue to increase in the near term in nearly all considered scenarios and modelled pathways. Deep, rapid, and sustained GHG emissions reductions, reaching net zero $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions and including strong emissions reductions of other GHGs, in particular $C H _ { 4 } ,$ are necessary to limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } \ ( > 5 0 \% )$ or less than ${ \displaystyle 2 ^ { \circ } } \mathbb { C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ by the end of century (high confidence). The best estimate of reaching $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ of global warming lies in the first half of the 2030s in most of the considered scenarios and modelled pathways114. In the very low GHG emissions scenario (SSP1-1.9), ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions reach net zero around 2050 and the best-estimate end-of-century warming is $1 . 4 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ,$ after a temporary overshoot (see Section 3.3.4) of no more than $0 . 1 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ above $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ global warming. Global warming of $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ will be exceeded during the 21st century unless deep reductions in ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ and other GHG emissions occur in the coming decades. Deep, rapid, and sustained reductions in GHG emissions would lead to improvements in air quality within a few years, to reductions in trends of global surface temperature discernible after around 20 years, and over longer time periods for many other climate impact-drivers115 (high confidence). Targeted reductions of air pollutant emissions lead to more rapid improvements in air quality compared to reductions in GHG emissions only, but in the long term, further improvements are projected in scenarios that combine efforts to reduce air pollutants as well as GHG emissions (high confidence)116. {WGI SPM B.1, WGI SPM B.1.3, WGI SPM D.1, WGI SPM D.2, WGI Figure SPM.4, WGI Table SPM.1, WGI Cross-Section Box TS.1; WGIII SPM C.3, WGIII Table SPM.2, WGIII Figure SPM.5, WGIII Box SPM.1 Figure 1, WGIII Table 3.2} (Table 3.1, Cross-Section Box.2 Figure 1)

Changes in short-lived climate forcers (SLCF) resulting from the five considered scenarios lead to an additional net global warming in the near and long term (high confidence). Simultaneous stringent climate change mitigation and air pollution control