# Section 2

Average annual GHG emissions during 2010–2019 were higher than in any previous decade, but the rate of growth between 2010 and 2019 $1 . 3 \%$ yr-1) was lower than that between 2000 and 2009 $( 2 . 1 \% \ y \mathbf { r } ^ { - 1 } ) ^ { 6 9 }$ . Historical cumulative net ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions from 1850 to 2019 were $2 4 0 0 \pm 2 4 0 \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 }$ . Of these, more than half $( 5 8 \% )$ occurred between 1850 and 1989 $[ 1 4 0 0 \pm 1 9 5 \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 } ] _ { \iota }$ and about $4 2 \%$ between 1990 and 2019 $[ 1 0 0 0 \pm 9 0 \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 } ]$ . Global net anthropogenic GHG emissions have been estimated to be $5 9 { \pm } 6 . 6 $ $\mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq in 2019, about $12 \%$ $6 . 5 \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq) higher than in 2010 and $54 \%$ (21 $\mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq) higher than in 1990. By 2019, the largest growth in gross emissions occurred in ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ from fossil fuels and industry $\left( \mathsf { C O } _ { 2 }  – \mathsf { F F } \mathsf { I } \right)$ followed by $\mathsf { C H } _ { 4 } ,$ whereas the highest relative growth occurred in fluorinated gases (F-gases), starting from low levels in 1990. (high confidence) {WGIII SPM B1.1, WGIII SPM B.1.2, WGIII SPM B.1.3, WGIII Figure SPM.1, WGIII Figure SPM.2}

Regional contributions to global human-caused GHG emissions continue to differ widely. Historical contributions of ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions vary substantially across regions in terms of total magnitude, but also in terms of contributions to ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ -FFI ( $1 6 5 0 \pm 7 3 \mathtt { G t C O } _ { 2 } \mathtt { - e q } ,$ and net ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ -LULUCF $( 7 6 0 \pm 2 2 0 \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 } – \mathsf { e q }$ ) emissions (Figure 2.2). Variations in regional and national per capita emissions partly reflect different development stages, but they also vary widely at similar income levels. Average per capita net anthropogenic GHG emissions in 2019 ranged from $2 . 6 \ \mathrm { t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq to $1 9 \ \mathrm { t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq across regions (Figure 2.2). Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and Small Island Developing States (SIDS) have much lower per capita emissions $( 1 . 7 \ \mathrm { t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq and $4 . 6 \ \mathrm { t C O } _ { 2 } – \mathsf e q$ , respectively) than the global average $( 6 . 9 \ \mathrm { \ t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq), excluding ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ -LULUCF. Around $4 8 \%$ of the global population in 2019 lives in countries emitting on average more than 6 $\mathrm { t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq per capita, $3 5 \%$ of the global population live in countries emitting more than 9 $\mathrm { t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq per capita70 (excluding ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ -LULUCF) while another $4 1 \%$ live in countries emitting less than $3 \ \mathrm { t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq per capita. A substantial share of the population in these low-emitting countries lack access to modern energy services. (high confidence) {WGIII SPM B.3, WGIII SPM B3.1, WGIII SPM B.3.2, WGIII SPM B.3.3}

Net GHG emissions have increased since 2010 across all major sectors (high confidence). In 2019, approximately $34 \%$ $2 0 \mathsf { G r C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq) of net global GHG emissions came from the energy sector, $2 4 \%$ ( $1 4 \ { \mathsf { G t C } } { \mathsf { O } } _ { 2 }$ -eq) from industry, $2 2 \%$ ( $1 3 \ { \mathsf { G t C } } { \mathsf { O } } _ { 2 }$ -eq) from AFOLU, $1 5 \%$ $( 8 . 7 \mathsf { G r C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq) from transport and $6 \%$ $3 . 3 \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq) from buildings71 (high confidence). Average annual GHG emissions growth between

2010 and 2019 slowed compared to the previous decade in energy supply (from $2 . 3 \%$ to $1 . 0 \%$ ) and industry (from $3 . 4 \%$ to $1 . 4 \%$ ) but remained roughly constant at about $2 \%$ yr–1 in the transport sector (high confidence). About half of total net AFOLU emissions are from ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ LULUCF, predominantly from deforestation (medium confidence). Land overall constituted a net sink of $- 6 . 6 \left( \pm 4 . 6 \right) \mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 } \mathsf { y r } ^ { 1 }$ for the period $2 0 1 0 { - } 2 0 1 9 ^ { 7 2 }$ (medium confidence). {WGIII SPM B.2, WGIII SPM B.2.1, WGIII SPM B.2.2, WGIII TS 5.6.1}

Human-caused climate change is a consequence of more than a century of net GHG emissions from energy use, land-use and land use change, lifestyle and patterns of consumption, and production. Emissions reductions in ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ from fossil fuels and industrial processes $( { \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ -FFI), due to improvements in energy intensity of GDP and carbon intensity of energy, have been less than emissions increases from rising global activity levels in industry, energy supply, transport, agriculture and buildings. The $10 \%$ of households with the highest per capita emissions contribute $3 4 - 4 5 \%$ of global consumption-based household GHG emissions, while the middle $40 \%$ contribute $4 0 { - } 5 3 \% ,$ , and the bottom $50 \%$ contribute $1 3 - 1 5 \%$ . An increasing share of emissions can be attributed to urban areas (a rise from about $62 \%$ to $6 7 - 7 2 \%$ of the global share between 2015 and 2020). The drivers of urban GHG emissions73 are complex and include population size, income, state of urbanisation and urban form. (high confidence) {WGIII SPM B.2, WGIII SPM B.2.3, WGIII SPM B.3.4, WGIII SPM D.1.1}