# Section 3

impacts on populations in low elevation coastal zones. If global warming increases, some compound extreme events124 will become more frequent, with higher likelihood of unprecedented intensities, durations or spatial extent (high confidence). The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation is very likely to weaken over the 21st century for all considered scenarios (high confidence), however an abrupt collapse is not expected before 2100 (medium confidence). If such a low probability event were to occur, it would very likely cause abrupt shifts in regional weather patterns and water cycle, such as a southward shift in the tropical rain belt, and large impacts on ecosystems and human activities. A sequence of large explosive volcanic eruptions within decades, as have occurred in the past, is a low-likelihood high-impact event that would lead to substantial cooling globally and regional climate perturbations over several decades. {WGI SPM B.5.3, WGI SPM C.3, WGI SPM C.3.1, WGI SPM C.3.2, WGI SPM C.3.3, WGI SPM C.3.4, WGI SPM C.3.5, WGI Figure SPM.8, WGI Box TS.3, WGI Figure TS.6, WGI Box 9.4; WGII SPM B.4.5, WGII SPM C.2.8; SROCC SPM B.2.7} (Figure 3.4, Cross-Section Box.2)

# 3.2 Long-term Adaptation Options and Limits

With increasing warming, adaptation options will become more constrained and less effective. At higher levels of warming, losses and damages will increase, and additional human and natural systems will reach adaptation limits. Integrated, cross-cutting multi-sectoral solutions increase the effectiveness of adaptation. Maladaptation can create lock-ins of vulnerability, exposure and risks but can be avoided by long-term planning and the implementation of adaptation actions that are flexible, multi-sectoral and inclusive. (high confidence)

The effectiveness of adaptation to reduce climate risk is documented for specific contexts, sectors and regions and will decrease with increasing warming (high confidence) 125. For example, common adaptation responses in agriculture – adopting improved cultivars and agronomic practices, and changes in cropping patterns and crop systems – will become less effective from $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ to higher levels of warming (high confidence). The effectiveness of most water-related adaptation options to reduce projected risks declines with increasing warming (high confidence). Adaptations for hydropower and thermo-electric power generation are effective in most regions up to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ,$ with decreasing effectiveness at higher levels of warming (medium confidence). Ecosystem-based Adaptation is vulnerable to climate change impacts, with effectiveness declining with increasing global warming (high confidence). Globally, adaptation options related to agroforestry and forestry have a sharp decline in effectiveness at $3 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ,$ with a substantial increase in residual risk (medium confidence). {WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.2.1, WGII SPM C.2.5, WGII SPM C.2.10, WGII Figure TS.6 Panel (e), 4.7.2}

With increasing global warming, more limits to adaptation will be reached and losses and damages, strongly concentrated among the poorest vulnerable populations, will increase (high confidence). Already below $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ,$ autonomous and evolutionary adaptation responses by terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems will increasingly face hard limits (high confidence) (Section 2.1.2). Above $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ,$ some ecosystem-based adaptation measures will lose their effectiveness in providing benefits to people as these ecosystems will reach hard adaptation limits (high confidence). Adaptation to address the risks of heat stress, heat mortality and reduced capacities for outdoor work for humans face soft and hard limits across regions that become significantly more severe at $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ,$ and are particularly relevant for regions with warm climates (high confidence). Above $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ global warming level, limited freshwater resources pose potential hard limits for small islands and for regions dependent on glacier and snow melt (medium confidence). By $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ,$ soft limits are projected for multiple staple crops, particularly in tropical regions (high confidence). By $3 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ,$ soft limits are projected for some water management measures for many regions, with hard limits projected for parts of Europe (medium confidence). {WGII SPM C.3, WGII SPM C.3.3, WGII SPM C.3.4, WGII SPM C.3.5, WGII TS.D.2.2, WGII TS.D.2.3; SR1.5 SPM B.6; SROCC SPM C.1}

Integrated, cross-cutting multi-sectoral solutions increase the effectiveness of adaptation. For example, inclusive, integrated and long-term planning at local, municipal, sub-national and national scales, together with effective regulation and monitoring systems and financial and technological resources and capabilities foster urban and rural system transition. There are a range of cross-cutting adaptation options, such as disaster risk management, early warning systems, climate services and risk spreading and sharing that have broad applicability across sectors and provide greater benefits to other adaptation options when combined. Transitioning from incremental to transformational adaptation, and addressing a range of constraints, primarily in the financial, governance, institutional and policy domains, can help overcome soft adaptation limits. However, adaptation does not prevent all losses and damages, even with effective adaptation and before reaching soft and hard limits. (high confidence) {WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.2.6, WGII SPM.C.2.13, WGII SPM C.3.1, WGII SPM.C.3.4, WGII SPM C.3.5, WGII Figure TS.6 Panel (e)}

Maladaptive responses to climate change can create lock-ins of vulnerability, exposure and risks that are difficult and expensive to change and exacerbate existing inequalities. Actions that focus on sectors and risks in isolation and on short-term gains often lead to maladaptation. Adaptation options can become maladaptive due to their environmental impacts that constrain ecosystem services and decrease biodiversity and ecosystem resilience to climate change or by causing adverse outcomes for different groups, exacerbating inequity. Maladaptation can be avoided by flexible, multi-sectoral, inclusive and