emissions came from the sectors of energy, industry, transport, and buildings together and $2 2 \% 1 0$ from agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU). Emissions reductions in ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ -FFI due to improvements in energy intensity of GDP and carbon intensity of energy, have been less than emissions increases from rising global activity levels in industry, energy supply, transport, agriculture and buildings. (high confidence) {2.1.1}

A.1.5 Historical contributions of ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions vary substantially across regions in terms of total magnitude, but also in terms of contributions to ${ \mathsf { C } } { \mathsf { O } } _ { 2 }$ -FFI and net ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions from land use, land-use change and forestry $\mathrm { C O } _ { 2 }$ -LULUCF). In 2019, around $3 5 \%$ of the global population live in countries emitting more than $9 \ \mathrm { t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq per capita11 (excluding ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ -LULUCF) while $4 1 \%$ live in countries emitting less than $3 \operatorname { t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq per capita; of the latter a substantial share lacks access to modern energy services. Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and Small Island Developing States (SIDS) have much lower per capita emissions $1 . 7 \mathrm { t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq and $4 . 6 \ \mathrm { t C } 0 _ { 2 }$ -eq, respectively) than the global average $( 6 . 9 \mathrm { t C } 0 _ { 2 }$ -eq), excluding ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ -LULUCF. The $10 \%$ of households with the highest per capita emissions contribute $3 4 - 4 5 \%$ of global consumption-based household GHG emissions, while the bottom $50 \%$ contribute $1 3 - 1 5 \%$ . (high confidence) {2.1.1, Figure 2.2}

# Observed Changes and Impacts

A.2 Widespread and rapid changes in the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and biosphere have occurred. Human-caused climate change is already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region across the globe. This has led to widespread adverse impacts and related losses and damages to nature and people (high confidence). Vulnerable communities who have historically contributed the least to current climate change are disproportionately affected (high confidence). {2.1, Table 2.1, Figure 2.2, Figure 2.3} (Figure SPM.1)

A.2.1 It is unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, ocean and land. Global mean sea level increased by 0.20 [0.15 to 0.25] m between 1901 and 2018. The average rate of sea level rise was 1.3 [0.6 to 2.1] mm yr-1 between 1901 and 1971, increasing to 1.9 [0.8 to 2.9] mm yr-1 between 1971 and 2006, and further increasing to 3.7 [3.2 to 4.2] mm yr-1 between 2006 and 2018 (high confidence). Human influence was very likely the main driver of these increases since at least 1971. Evidence of observed changes in extremes such as heatwaves, heavy precipitation, droughts, and tropical cyclones, and, in particular, their attribution to human influence, has further strengthened since AR5. Human influence has likely increased the chance of compound extreme events since the 1950s, including increases in the frequency of concurrent heatwaves and droughts (high confidence). {2.1.2, Table 2.1, Figure 2.3, Figure 3.4} (Figure SPM.1)

A.2.2 Approximately 3.3 to 3.6 billion people live in contexts that are highly vulnerable to climate change. Human and ecosystem vulnerability are interdependent. Regions and people with considerable development constraints have high vulnerability to climatic hazards. Increasing weather and climate extreme events have exposed millions of people to acute food insecurity12 and reduced water security, with the largest adverse impacts observed in many locations and/or communities in Africa, Asia, Central and South America, LDCs, Small Islands and the Arctic, and globally for Indigenous Peoples, small-scale food producers and low-income households. Between 2010 and 2020, human mortality from floods, droughts and storms was 15 times higher in highly vulnerable regions, compared to regions with very low vulnerability. (high confidence) {2.1.2, 4.4} (Figure SPM.1)

A.2.3 Climate change has caused substantial damages, and increasingly irreversible losses, in terrestrial, freshwater, cryospheric, and coastal and open ocean ecosystems (high confidence). Hundreds of local losses of species have been driven by increases in the magnitude of heat extremes (high confidence) with mass mortality events recorded on land and in the ocean (very high confidence). Impacts on some ecosystems are approaching irreversibility such as the impacts of hydrological changes resulting from the retreat of glaciers, or the changes in some mountain (medium confidence) and Arctic ecosystems driven by permafrost thaw (high confidence). {2.1.2, Figure 2.3} (Figure SPM.1)