# 2.3 Current Mitigation and Adaptation Actions and Policies are not Sufficient

At the time of the present assessment88 there are gaps between global ambitions and the sum of declared national ambitions. These are further compounded by gaps between declared national ambitions and current implementation for all aspects of climate action. For mitigation, global GHG emissions in 2030 implied by NDCs announced by October 2021 would make it likely that warming will exceed $1 . 5 \textdegree$ during the 21st century and would make it harder to limit warming below $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } . ^ { 8 9 }$ Despite progress, adaptation gaps90 persist, with many initiatives prioritising short-term risk reduction, hindering transformational adaptation. Hard and soft limits to adaptation are being reached in some sectors and regions, while maladaptation is also increasing and disproportionately affecting vulnerable groups. Systemic barriers such as funding, knowledge, and practice gaps, including lack of climate literacy and data hinders adaptation progress. Insufficient financing, especially for adaptation, constraints climate action in particular in developing countries. (high confidence)

# 89 See CSB.2 for a discussion of scenarios and pathways.2.3.1. The Gap Between Mitigation Policies, Pledges and Pathways that Limit Warming to $1 . 5 \%$ or Below ${ \bf 2 ^ { \circ } C }$

Global GHG emissions in 2030 associated with the implementation of NDCs announced prior to $\tt C O P 2 6 ^ { 9 1 }$ would make it likely that warming will exceed $1 . 5 \%$ during the 21st century and would make it harder to limit warming below ${ \displaystyle 2 ^ { \circ } \mathbb { C } }$ – if no additional commitments are made or actions taken (Figure 2.5, Table 2.2). A substantial ‘emissions gap’ exists as global GHG emissions in 2030 associated with the implementation of NDCs announced prior to COP26 would be similar to or only slightly below 2019 emission levels and higher than those associated with modelled mitigation pathways that limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 5 0 \% )$ with no or limited overshoot or to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ , assuming immediate action, which implies deep, rapid, and sustained global GHG emission reductions this decade (high confidence) (Table 2.2, Table 3.1, 4.1).92 The magnitude of the emissions gap depends on the global warming level considered and whether only unconditional or also conditional elements of ${ \mathsf { N D C } } { \mathsf { S } } ^ { 9 3 }$ are considered (high confidence) (Table 2.2). Modelled pathways that are consistent with NDCs announced prior to COP26 until 2030 and assume no increase in ambition thereafter have higher emissions, leading to a median global warming of 2.8 [2.1 to $3 . 4 ] ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ by 2100 (medium confidence). If the ‘emission gap’ is not reduced, global GHG emissions in 2030 consistent with NDCs announced prior to COP26 make it likely that warming will exceed $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ during the 21st century, while limiting warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ would imply an unprecedented acceleration of mitigation efforts during 2030–2050 (medium confidence) (see Section 4.1, Cross-Section Box.2). {WGIII SPM B.6, WGIII SPM B.6.1, WGIII SPM B.6.3, WGIII SPM B.6.4, WGIII SPM C.1.1}

Policies implemented by the end of 2020 are projected to result in higher global GHG emissions in 2030 than those implied by NDCs, indicating an ‘implementation ${ \mathfrak { g a p } } ^ { { \mathfrak { g } } { 4 } ^ { \prime } }$ (high confidence) (Table 2.2, Figure 2.5). Projected global emissions implied by policies implemented by the end of 2020 are 57 (52–60) $\mathsf { G t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq in 2030 (Table 2.2). This points to an implementation gap compared with the NDCs of 4 to ${ 7 ~ \mathsf { G t C } } 0 _ { 2 }$ -eq in 2030 (Table 2.2); without a strengthening of policies, emissions are projected to rise, leading to a median global warming of $2 . 2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ to $3 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ (very likely range) by 2100 (medium confidence) (see Section 3.1.1). {WGIII SPM B.6.1, WGIII SPM C.1}