# Section 4

Scaling-up near-term climate actions (Section 4.1) will mobilise a mix of low-cost and high-cost options. High-cost options, as in energy and infrastructure, are needed to avoid future lock-ins, foster innovation and initiate transformational changes (Figure 4.4). Climate resilient development pathways in support of sustainable development for all are shaped by equity, and social and climate justice (very high confidence). Embedding effective and equitable adaptation and mitigation in development planning can reduce vulnerability, conserve and restore ecosystems, and enable climate resilient development. This is especially challenging in localities with persistent development gaps and limited resources. (high confidence) {WGII SPM C.5, WGII SPM D1; WGIII TS.5.2, WGIII 8.3.1, WGIII 8.3.4, WGIII 8.4.1, WGIII 8.6}

Scaling-up climate action may generate disruptive changes in economic structure with distributional consequences and need to reconcile divergent interests, values and worldviews, within and between countries. Deeper fiscal, financial, institutional and regulatory reforms can offset such adverse effects and unlock mitigation potentials. Societal choices and actions implemented in this decade will determine the extent to which medium and long-term development pathways will deliver higher or lower climate resilient development outcomes. (high confidence) {WGII SPM D.2, WGII SPM D.5, WGII Box TS.8; WGIII SPM D.3, WGIII SPM E.2, WGIII SPM E.3, WGIII SPM E.4, WGIII TS.2, WGIII TS.4.1, WGIII TS.6.4, WGIII 15.2, WGIII 15.6}

Enabling conditions would need to be strengthened in the nearterm and barriers reduced or removed to realise opportunities for deep and rapid adaptation and mitigation actions and climate resilient development (high confidence) (Figure 4.2). These enabling conditions are differentiated by national, regional and local circumstances and geographies, according to capabilities, and include: equity and inclusion in climate action (see Section 4.4), rapid and far-reaching transitions in sectors and system (see Section 4.5), measures to achieve synergies and reduce tradeoffs with sustainable development goals (see Section 4.6), governance and policy improvements (see Section 4.7), access to finance, improved international cooperation and technology improvements (see Section 4.8), and integration of near-term actions across sectors, systems and regions (see Section 4.9). {WGII SPM D.2; WGIII SPM E.1, WGIII SPM E.2}

Barriers to feasibility would need to be reduced or removed to deploy mitigation and adaptation options at scale. Many limits to feasibility and effectiveness of responses can be overcome by addressing a range of barriers, including economic, technological, institutional, social, environmental and geophysical barriers. The feasibility and effectiveness of options increase with integrated, multi-sectoral solutions that differentiate responses based on climate risk, cut across systems and address social inequities. Strengthened near-term actions in modelled cost-effective pathways that limit global warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ or lower, reduce the overall risk to the feasibility of the system transitions, compared to modelled pathways with delayed or uncoordinated action. (high confidence) {WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.3, WGII SPM C.5; WGIII SPM E.1, WGIII SPM E.1.3}

Integrating ambitious climate actions with macroeconomic policies under global uncertainty would provide benefits (high confidence). This encompasses three main directions:

(a) economy-wide mainstreaming packages supporting options to improved sustainable low-emission economic recovery, development and job creation programs (Sections 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.8, 4.9) (b) safety nets and social protection in the transition (Section 4.4, 4.7); and (c) broadened access to finance, technology and capacity-building and coordinated support to low-emission infrastructure (‘leap-frog’ potential), especially in developing regions, and under debt stress (high confidence). (Section 4.8) {WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.4.1, WGII SPM D.1.3, WGII SPM D.2, WGII SPM D.3.2, WGII SPM E.2.2, WGII SPM E.4, WGII SPM TS.2, WGII SPM TS.5.2, WGII TS.6.4, WGII TS.15, WGII TS Box TS.3; WGIII SPM B.4.2, WGIII SPM C.5.4, WGIII SPM C.6.2, WGIII SPM C.12.2, WGIII SPM D.3.4, WGIII SPM E.4.2, WGIII SPM E.4.5, WGIII SPM E.5.2, WGIII SPM E.5.3, WGIII TS.1, WGIII Box TS.15, WGIII 15.2, WGIII Cross-Chapter Box 1 on COVID in Chapter 1}