# 3.1.2 Impacts and Related Risks

For a given level of warming, many climate-related risks are assessed to be higher than in AR5 (high confidence). Levels of $\mathsf { r i s k } ^ { 1 2 0 }$ for all Reasons for Concern121 (RFCs) are assessed to become high to very high at lower global warming levels compared to what was assessed in AR5 (high confidence). This is based upon recent evidence of observed impacts, improved process understanding, and new knowledge on exposure and vulnerability of human and natural systems, including limits to adaptation. Depending on the level of global warming, the assessed long-term impacts will be up to multiple times higher than currently observed (high confidence) for 127 identified key risks, e.g., in terms of the number of affected people and species. Risks, including cascading risks (see 3.1.3) and risks from overshoot (see 3.3.4), are projected to become increasingly severe with every increment of global warming (very high confidence). {WGII SPM B.3.3, WGII SPM B.4, WGII SPM B.5, WGII 16.6.3; SRCCL SPM A5.3} (Figure 3.2, Figure 3.3)

Climate-related risks for natural and human systems are higher for global warming of $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ than at present $( 1 . 1 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } )$ but lower than at $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ (high confidence) (see Section 2.1.2). Climate-related risks to health, livelihoods, food security, water supply, human security, and economic growth are projected to increase with global warming of $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ . In terrestrial ecosystems, 3 to $1 4 \%$ of the tens of thousands of species assessed will likely face a very high risk of extinction at a GWL of $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ . Coral reefs are projected to decline by a further $7 0 - 9 0 \%$ at $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ of global warming (high confidence). At this GWL, many low-elevation and small glaciers around the world would lose most of their mass or disappear within decades to centuries (high confidence). Regions at disproportionately higher risk include Arctic ecosystems, dryland regions, small island developing states and Least Developed Countries (high confidence). {WGII SPM B.3, WGII SPM B.4.1, WGII TS.C.4.2; SR1.5 SPM A.3, SR1.5 SPM B.4.2, SR1.5 SPM B.5, SR1.5 SPM B.5.1} (Figure 3.3)

At $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ of global warming, overall risk levels associated with the unequal distribution of impacts (RFC3), global aggregate impacts (RFC4) and large-scale singular events (RFC5) would be transitioning to high (medium confidence), those associated with extreme weather events (RFC2) would be transitioning to very high (medium confidence), and those associated with unique and threatened systems (RFC1) would be very high (high confidence) (Figure 3.3, panel a). With about $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ warming, climate-related changes in food availability and diet quality are estimated to increase nutrition-related diseases and the number of undernourished people, affecting tens (under low vulnerability and low warming) to hundreds of millions of people (under high vulnerability and high warming), particularly among low-income households in low- and middle-income countries in sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia and Central America (high confidence). For example, snowmelt water availability for irrigation is projected to decline in some snowmelt dependent river basins by up to $20 \%$ (medium confidence). Climate change risks to cities, settlements and key infrastructure will rise sharply in the mid and long term with further global warming, especially in places already exposed to high temperatures, along coastlines, or with high vulnerabilities (high confidence). {WGII SPM B.3.3, WGII SPM B.4.2, WGII SPM B.4.5, WGII TS C.3.3, WGII TS.C.12.2} (Figure 3.3)

At global warming of $3 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ,$ additional risks in many sectors and regions reach high or very high levels, implying widespread systemic impacts, irreversible change and many additional adaptation limits (see Section 3.2) (high confidence). For example, very high extinction risk for endemic species in biodiversity hotspots is projected to increase at least tenfold if warming rises from $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ to $3 \textdegree C$ (medium confidence). Projected increases in direct flood damages are higher by 1.4 to 2 times at $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ and 2.5 to 3.9 times at $3 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ , compared to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ global warming without adaptation (medium confidence). {WGII SPM B.4.1, WGII SPM B.4.2, WGII Figure SPM.3, WGII TS Appendix AII, WGII Appendix I Global to Regional Atlas Figure AI.46} (Figure 3.2, Figure 3.3)

Global warming of $4 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ and above is projected to lead to far-reaching impacts on natural and human systems (high confidence). Beyond $4 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ of warming, projected impacts on natural systems include local extinction of $\sim 5 0 \%$ of tropical marine species (medium confidence) and biome shifts across $3 5 \%$ of global land area (medium confidence). At this level of warming, approximately $10 \%$ of the global land area is projected to face both increasing high and decreasing low extreme streamflow, affecting, without additional adaptation, over 2.1 billion people (medium confidence) and about 4 billion people are projected to experience water scarcity (medium confidence). At $4 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ of warming, the global burned area is projected to increase by 50 to $70 \%$ and the fire frequency by $\sim 3 0 \%$ compared to today (medium confidence). {WGII SPM B.4.1, WGII SPM B.4.2, WGII TS.C.1.2, WGII TS.C.2.3, WGII TS.C.4.1, WGII TS.C.4.4} (Figure 3.2, Figure 3.3)