# Cross-Section Box.2: Scenarios, Global Warming Levels, and Risks

Modelled scenarios and pathways102 are used to explore future emissions, climate change, related impacts and risks, and possible mitigation and adaptation strategies and are based on a range of assumptions, including socio-economic variables and mitigation options. These are quantitative projections and are neither predictions nor forecasts. Global modelled emission pathways, including those based on cost effective approaches contain regionally differentiated assumptions and outcomes, and have to be assessed with the careful recognition of these assumptions. Most do not make explicit assumptions about global equity, environmental justice or intra-regional income distribution. IPCC is neutral with regard to the assumptions underlying the scenarios in the literature assessed in this report, which do not cover all possible futures103. {WGI Box SPM.1; WGII Box SPM.1; WGIII Box SPM.1; SROCC Box SPM.1; SRCCL Box SPM.1}

# Socio-economic Development, Scenarios, and Pathways

The five Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSP1 to SSP5) were designed to span a range of challenges to climate change mitigation and adaptation.   
For the assessment of climate impacts, risk and adaptation, the SSPs are used for future exposure, vulnerability and challenges to adaptation.   
Depending on levels of GHG mitigation, modelled emissions scenarios based on the SSPs can be consistent with low or high warming levels104.   
There are many different mitigation strategies that could be consistent with different levels of global warming in 2100 (see Figure 4.1).   
{WGI Box SPM.1; WGII Box SPM.1; WGIII Box SPM.1, WGIII Box TS.5, WGIII Annex III; SRCCL Box SPM.1, SRCCL Figure SPM.2}

WGI assessed the climate response to five illustrative scenarios based on ${ \mathsf { S S P S } } ^ { 1 0 5 }$ that cover the range of possible future development of anthropogenic drivers of climate change found in the literature. These scenarios combine socio-economic assumptions, levels of climate mitigation, land use and air pollution controls for aerosols and non- $\cdot \mathsf { C H } _ { 4 }$ ozone precursors. The high and very high GHG emissions scenarios (SSP3-7.0 and SSP5-8.5) have ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions that roughly double from current levels by 2100 and 2050, respectively106. The intermediate GHG emissions scenario (SSP2-4.5) has ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions remaining around current levels until the middle of the century. The very low and low GHG emissions scenarios (SSP1-1.9 and SSP1-2.6) have ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions declining to net zero around 2050 and 2070, respectively, followed by varying levels of net negative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions. In addition, Representative Concentration Pathways $( { \mathsf { R C P S } } ) ^ { 1 0 7 }$ were used by WGI and WGII to assess regional climate changes, impacts and risks. {WGI Box SPM.1} (Cross-Section Box.2 Figure 1)

In WGIII, a large number of global modelled emissions pathways were assessed, of which 1202 pathways were categorised based on their projected global warming over the 21st century, with categories ranging from pathways that limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ with more than $50 \%$ likelihood108 with no or limited overshoot (C1) to pathways that exceed $4 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ (C8). Methods to project global warming associated with the modelled pathways were updated to ensure consistency with the AR6 WGI assessment of the climate system response109. {WGIII Box SPM.1,WGIII Table 3.1} (Table 3.1, Cross-Section Box.2 Figure 1)