# Section 4

Global warming will continue to increase in the near term (2021–2040) mainly due to increased cumulative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions in nearly all considered scenarios and pathways. In the near term, every region in the world is projected to face further increases in climate hazards (medium to high confidence, depending on region and hazard), increasing multiple risks to ecosystems and humans (very high confidence). In the near term, natural variability149 will modulate human-caused changes, either attenuating or amplifying projected changes, especially at regional scales, with little effect on centennial global warming. Those modulations are important to consider in adaptation planning. Global surface temperature in any single year can vary above or below the long-term human-induced trend, due to natural variability. By 2030, global surface temperature in any individual year could exceed $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ relative to 1850–1900 with a probability between $40 \%$ and $60 \%$ , across the five scenarios assessed in WGI (medium confidence). The occurrence of individual years with global surface temperature change above a certain level does not imply that this global warming level has been reached. If a large explosive volcanic eruption were to occur in the near term150 , it would temporarily and partially mask human-caused climate change by reducing global surface temperature and precipitation, especially over land, for one to three years (medium confidence). {WGI SPM B.1.3, WGI SPM B.1.4, WGI SPM C.1, WGI SPM C.2, WGI Cross-Section Box TS.1, WGI Cross-Chapter Box 4.1; WGII SPM B.3, WGII SPM B.3.1; WGIII Box SPM.1 Figure 1}

The level of risk for humans and ecosystems will depend on near-term trends in vulnerability, exposure, level of socio-economic development and adaptation (high confidence). In the near term, many climate-associated risks to natural and human systems depend more strongly on changes in these systems’ vulnerability and exposure than on differences in climate hazards between emissions scenarios (high confidence). Future exposure to climatic hazards is increasing globally due to socio-economic development trends including growing inequality, and when urbanisation or migration increase exposure (high confidence). Urbanisation increases hot extremes (very high confidence) and precipitation runoff intensity (high confidence). Increasing urbanisation in low-lying and coastal zones will be a major driver of increasing exposure to extreme riverflow events and sea level rise hazards, increasing risks (high confidence) (Figure 4.3). Vulnerability will also rise rapidly in low-lying Small Island Developing States and atolls in the context of sea level rise (high confidence) (see Figure 3.4 and Figure 4.3). Human vulnerability will concentrate in informal settlements and rapidly growing smaller settlements; and vulnerability in rural areas will be heightened by reduced habitability and high reliance on climate-sensitive livelihoods (high confidence). Human and ecosystem vulnerability are interdependent (high confidence). Vulnerability to climate change for ecosystems will be strongly influenced by past, present, and future patterns of human development, including from unsustainable consumption and production, increasing demographic pressures, and persistent unsustainable use and management of land, ocean, and water (high confidence). Several near-term risks can be moderated with adaptation (high confidence). {WGI SPM C.2.6; W G I I S P M B. 2 , W G I I S P M B. 2 . 3 , W G I I S P M B.2.5, WGII SPM B.3, WGII SPM B.3.2, WGII TS.C.5.2} (Section 4.5 and 3.2)

Principal hazards and associated risks expected in the near term (at $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ global warming) are:

• Increased intensity and frequency of hot extremes and dangerous heat-humidity conditions, with increased human mortality, morbidity, and labour productivity loss (high confidence). {WGI SPM B.2.2, WGI TS Figure $T S . 6 ;$ ; WGII SPM B.1.4, W G I I S P M B. 4 . 4 , WGII Figure SPM.2}   
• Increasing frequency of marine heatwaves will increase risks of biodiversity loss in the oceans, including from mass mortality events (high confidence). {WGI SPM B.2.3; WGII SPM B.1.2, WGII Figure SPM.2; SROCC SPM B.5.1}   
Near-term risks for biodiversity loss are moderate to high in forest ecosystems (medium confidence) and kelp and seagrass ecosystems (high to very high confidence) and are high to very high in Arctic sea-ice and terrestrial ecosystems (high confidence) and warm-water coral reefs (very high confidence). {WGII SPM B.3.1}   
• More intense and frequent extreme rainfall and associated flooding in many regions including coastal and other low-lying cities (medium to high confidence), and increased proportion of and peak wind speeds of intense tropical cyclones (high confidence). {WGI SPM B.2.4, WGI SPM C.2.2, WGI SPM C.2.6, WGI 11.7}   
• High risks from dryland water scarcity, wildfire damage, and permafrost degradation (medium confidence). {SRCCL SPM A.5.3.}   
• Continued sea level rise and increased frequency and magnitude of extreme sea level events encroaching on coastal human settlements and damaging coastal infrastructure (high confidence), committing low-lying coastal ecosystems to submergence and loss (medium confidence), expanding land salinization (very high confidence), with cascading to risks to livelihoods, health, well-being, cultural values, food and water security (high confidence). {WGI SPM C.2.5, WGI SPM C.2.6; WGII SPM B.3.1, WGII SPM B.5.2; SRCCL SPM A.5.6; SROCC SPM B.3.4, SROCC SPM 3.6, SROCC SPM B.9.1} (Figure 3.4, 4.3) Climate change will significantly increase ill health and premature deaths from the near to long term (high confidence). Further warming will increase climate-sensitive food-borne, water-borne, and vector-borne disease risks (high confidence), and mental health challenges including anxiety and stress (very high confidence). {WGII SPM B.4.4}