Improved access to clean energy sources and technologies, and shifts to active mobility (e.g., walking and cycling) and public transport can deliver socioeconomic, air quality and health benefits, especially for women and children (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2.2, WGII SPM C.2.11, WGII Cross-Chapter Box HEALTH; WGIII SPM C.2.2, WGIII SPM C.4.2, WGIII SPM C.9.1, WGIII SPM C.10.4, WGIII SPM D.1.3, WGIII Figure SPM.6, WGIII Figure SPM.8; SRCCL SPM B.6.2, SRCCL SPM B.6.3, SRCCL B.4.6, SRCCL SPM C.2.4}

Effective adaptation options exist to help protect human health and well-being (high confidence). Health Action Plans that include early warning and response systems are effective for extreme heat (high confidence). Effective options for water-borne and food-borne diseases include improving access to potable water, reducing exposure of water and sanitation systems to flooding and extreme weather events, and improved early warning systems (very high confidence). For vector-borne diseases, effective adaptation options include surveillance, early warning systems, and vaccine development (very high confidence). Effective adaptation options for reducing mental health risks under climate change include improving surveillance and access to mental health care, and monitoring of psychosocial impacts from extreme weather events (high confidence). A key pathway to climate resilience in the health sector is universal access to healthcare (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2.11, WGII 7.4.6}

# 4.5.6 Society, Livelihoods, and Economies

Enhancing knowledge on risks and available adaptation options promotes societal responses, and behaviour and lifestyle changes supported by policies, infrastructure and technology can help reduce global GHG emissions (high confidence). Climate literacy and information provided through climate services and community approaches, including those that are informed by Indigenous Knowledge and local knowledge, can accelerate behavioural changes and planning (high confidence). Educational and information programmes, using the arts, participatory modelling and citizen science can facilitate awareness, heighten risk perception, and influence behaviours (high confidence). The way choices are presented can enable adoption of low GHG intensive socio-cultural options, such as shifts to balanced, sustainable healthy diets, reduced food waste, and active mobility (high confidence). Judicious labelling, framing, and communication of social norms can increase the effect of mandates, subsidies, or taxes (medium confidence). {WGII SPM C.5.3, WGII TS.D.10.1; WGIII SPM C.10, WGIII SPM C.10.2, WGIII SPM C.10.3, WGIII SPM E.2.2, WGIII Figure SPM.6, WGIII TS.6.1, 5.4; SR1.5 SPM D.5.6; SROCC SPM C.4}

A range of adaptation options, such as disaster risk management, early warning systems, climate services and risk spreading and sharing approaches, have broad applicability across sectors and provide greater risk reduction benefits when combined (high confidence). Climate services that are demand-driven and inclusive of different users and providers can improve agricultural practices, inform better water use and efficiency, and enable resilient infrastructure planning (high confidence). Policy mixes that include weather and health insurance, social protection and adaptive safety nets, contingent finance and reserve funds, and universal access to early warning systems combined with effective contingency plans, can reduce vulnerability and exposure of human systems (high confidence).

Integrating climate adaptation into social protection programs, including cash transfers and public works programs, is highly feasible and increases resilience to climate change, especially when supported by basic services and infrastructure (high confidence). Social safety nets can build adaptive capacities, reduce socioeconomic vulnerability, and reduce risk linked to hazards (robust evidence, medium agreement). {WGII SPM C.2.9, WGII SPM C.2.13, WGII Cross-Chapter Box FEASIB in Chapter 18; SRCCL SPM C.1.4, SRCCL SPM D.1.2}

Reducing future risks of involuntary migration and displacement due to climate change is possible through cooperative, international efforts to enhance institutional adaptive capacity and sustainable development (high confidence). Increasing adaptive capacity minimises risk associated with involuntary migration and immobility and improves the degree of choice under which migration decisions are made, while policy interventions can remove barriers and expand the alternatives for safe, orderly and regular migration that allows vulnerable people to adapt to climate change (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2.12, WGII TS.D.8.6, WGII Cross-Chapter Box MIGRATE in Chapter 7}

Accelerating commitment and follow-through by the private sector is promoted for instance by building business cases for adaptation, accountability and transparency mechanisms, and monitoring and evaluation of adaptation progress (medium confidence). Integrated pathways for managing climate risks will be most suitable when so-called ‘low-regret’ anticipatory options are established jointly across sectors in a timely manner and are feasible and effective in their local context, and when path dependencies and maladaptations across sectors are avoided (high confidence). Sustained adaptation actions are strengthened by mainstreaming adaptation into institutional budget and policy planning cycles, statutory planning, monitoring and evaluation frameworks and into recovery efforts from disaster events (high confidence). Instruments that incorporate adaptation such as policy and legal frameworks, behavioural incentives, and economic instruments that address market failures, such as climate risk disclosure, inclusive and deliberative processes strengthen adaptation actions by public and private actors (medium confidence). {WGII SPM C.5.1, WGII SPM C.5.2, WGII TS.D.10.4}