Section 4

# Section 4 : Near-Term Responses in a Changing Climate

# 4.1 The Timing and Urgency of Climate Action

Deep, rapid, and sustained mitigation and accelerated implementation of adaptation reduces the risks of climate change for humans and ecosystems. In modelled pathways that limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } \left( > 5 0 \% \right)$ with no or limited overshoot and in those that limit warming to ${ \sf z } ^ { \circ } { \sf C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ and assume immediate action, global GHG emissions are projected to peak in the early 2020s followed by rapid and deep reductions. As adaptation options often have long implementation times, accelerated implementation of adaptation, particularly in this decade, is important to close adaptation gaps. (high confidence)

The magnitude and rate of climate change and associated risks depend strongly on near-term mitigation and adaptation actions (very high confidence). Global warming is more likely than not to reach $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ between 2021 and 2040 even under the very low GHG emission scenarios (SSP1-1.9), and likely or very likely to exceed $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ under higher emissions scenarios141. Many adaptation options have medium or high feasibility up to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ (medium to high confidence, depending on option), but hard limits to adaptation have already been reached in some ecosystems and the effectiveness of adaptation to reduce climate risk will decrease with increasing warming (high confidence). Societal choices and actions implemented in this decade determine the extent to which medium- and long-term pathways will deliver higher or lower climate resilient development (high confidence). Climate resilient development prospects are increasingly limited if current greenhouse gas emissions do not rapidly decline, especially if $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ global warming is exceeded in the near term (high confidence). Without urgent, effective and equitable adaptation and mitigation actions, climate change increasingly threatens the health and livelihoods of people around the globe, ecosystem health, and biodiversity, with severe adverse consequences for current and future generations (high confidence). {WGI SPM B.1.3, WGI SPM B.5.1, WGI SPM B.5.2; WGII SPM A, WGII SPM B.4, WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.3.3, WGII Figure SPM.4, WGII SPM D.1, WGII SPM D.5, WGIII SPM D.1.1 SR1.5 SPM D.2.2}. (Cross-Section Box.2, Figure 2.1, Figure 2.3)

In modelled pathways that limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } \left( > 5 0 \% \right)$ with no or limited overshoot and in those that limit warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } \left( > 6 7 \% \right)$ , assuming immediate actions, global GHG emissions are projected to peak in the early 2020s followed by rapid and deep GHG emissions reductions (high confidence) 142. In pathways that limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 5 0 \% )$ with no or limited overshoot, net global GHG emissions are projected to fall by 43 [34 to $6 0 ] \% \%$ below 2019 levels by 2030, 60 [49 to $7 7 ] \%$ by 2035, 69 [58 to $9 0 \%$ by 2040 and 84 [73 to $9 8 ] \%$ by 2050 (high confidence) (Section 2.3.1, Table 2.2, Figure 2.5, Table 3.1)144. Global modelled pathways that limit warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ ) have reductions in GHG emissions below 2019 levels of 21 [1 to $4 2 ] \%$ by 2030, 35 [22 to 55] $\%$ by 2035, 46 [34 to 63] $\%$ by 2040 and 64 [53 to $7 7 ] \%$ by $2 0 5 0 ^ { 1 4 5 }$ (high confidence). Global GHG emissions associated with NDCs announced prior to COP26 would make it likely that warming would exceed $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ (high confidence) and limiting warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ would then imply a rapid acceleration of emission reductions during 2030–2050, around $70 \%$ faster than in pathways where immediate action is taken to limit warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ (medium confidence) (Section 2.3.1) Continued investments in unabated high-emitting infrastructure146 and limited development and deployment of low-emitting alternatives prior to 2030 would act as barriers to this acceleration and increase feasibility risks (high confidence). {WGIII SPM B.6.3, WGIII 3.5.2, WGIII SPM B.6, WGIII SPM B.6., WGIII SPM C.1, WGIII SPM C1.1, WGIII Table SPM.2} (Cross-Section Box.2)