policies limit this additional warming and lead to strong benefits for air quality (high confidence). In high and very high GHG emissions scenarios (SSP3-7.0 and SSP5-8.5), combined changes in SLCF emissions, such as $\mathsf { C H } _ { 4 } ,$ aerosol and ozone precursors, lead to a net global warming by 2100 of likely $0 . 4 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ to $0 . 9 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ relative to 2019. This is due to projected increases in atmospheric concentration of $\mathsf { C H } _ { 4 } ,$ tropospheric ozone, hydrofluorocarbons and, when strong air pollution control is considered, reductions of cooling aerosols. In low and very low GHG emissions scenarios (SSP1-1.9 and SSP1-2.6), air pollution control policies, reductions in $\mathsf { C H } _ { 4 }$ and other ozone precursors lead to a net cooling, whereas reductions in anthropogenic cooling aerosols lead to a net warming (high confidence). Altogether, this causes a likely net warming of $0 . 0 \%$ to $0 . 3 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ due to SLCF changes in 2100 relative to 2019 and strong reductions in global surface ozone and particulate matter (high confidence). {WGI SPM D.1.7, WGI Box TS.7} (Cross-Section Box.2)

Continued GHG emissions will further affect all major climate system components, and many changes will be irreversible on centennial to millennial time scales. Many changes in the climate system become larger in direct relation to increasing global warming. With every additional increment of global warming, changes in extremes continue to become larger. Additional warming will lead to more frequent and intense marine heatwaves and is projected to further amplify permafrost thawing and loss of seasonal snow cover, glaciers, land ice and Arctic sea ice (high confidence). Continued global warming is projected to further intensify the global water cycle, including its variability, global monsoon precipitation117, and very wet and very dry weather and climate events and seasons (high confidence). The portion of global land experiencing detectable changes in seasonal mean precipitation is projected to increase (medium confidence) with more variable precipitation and surface water flows over most land regions within seasons (high confidence) and from year to year (medium confidence). Many changes due to past and future GHG emissions are irreversible118 on centennial to millennial time scales, especially in the ocean, ice sheets and global sea level (see 3.1.3). Ocean acidification (virtually certain), ocean deoxygenation (high confidence) and global mean sea level (virtually certain) will continue to increase in the 21st century, at rates dependent on future emissions. {WGI SPM B.2, WGI SPM B.2.2, WGI SPM B.2.3, WGI SPM B.2.5, WGI SPM B.3, WGI SPM B.3.1, WGI SPM B.3.2, WGI SPM B.4, WGI SPM B.5, WGI SPM B.5.1, WGI SPM B.5.3, WGI Figure SPM.8} (Figure 3.1)

With further global warming, every region is projected to increasingly experience concurrent and multiple changes in climatic impact-drivers. Increases in hot and decreases in cold climatic impact-drivers, such as temperature extremes, are projected in all regions (high confidence). At $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ global warming, heavy precipitation and flooding events are projected to intensify and become more frequent in most regions in Africa, Asia (high confidence), North America (medium to high confidence) and Europe (medium confidence). At $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ or above, these changes expand to more regions and/or become more significant (high confidence), and more frequent and/or severe agricultural and ecological droughts are projected in Europe, Africa, Australasia and North, Central and South America (medium to high confidence). Other projected regional changes include intensification of tropical cyclones and/or extratropical storms (medium confidence), and increases in aridity and fire weather119 (medium to high confidence). Compound heatwaves and droughts become likely more frequent, including concurrently at multiple locations (high confidence). {WGI SPM C.2, WGI SPM C.2.1, WGI SPM C.2.2, WGI SPM C.2.3, WGI SPM C.2.4, WGI SPM C.2.7}