# Section 4

and marginalised communities including people living in informal settlements (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2.5, WGII SPM C.2.6, WGII SPM C.2.7, WGII SPM D.3.2, WGII TS.E.1.4, WGII Cross-Chapter Box FEAS; WGIII SPM C.6, WGIII SPM C.6.2, WGIII SPM D.1.3, WGIII SPM D.2.1}

Responses to ongoing sea level rise and land subsidence in low-lying coastal cities and settlements and small islands include protection, accommodation, advance and planned relocation. These responses are more effective if combined and/or sequenced, planned well ahead, aligned with sociocultural values and development priorities, and underpinned by inclusive community engagement processes. (high confidence) {WGII SPM C.2.8}

# 4.5.4. Land, Ocean, Food, and Water

There is substantial mitigation and adaptation potential from options in agriculture, forestry and other land use, and in the oceans, that could be upscaled in the near term across most regions (high confidence) (Figure 4.5). Conservation, improved management, and restoration of forests and other ecosystems offer the largest share of economic mitigation potential, with reduced deforestation in tropical regions having the highest total mitigation potential. Ecosystem restoration, reforestation, and afforestation can lead to trade-offs due to competing demands on land. Minimizing trade-offs requires integrated approaches to meet multiple objectives including food security. Demand-side measures (shifting to sustainable healthy diets and reducing food loss/waste) and sustainable agricultural intensification can reduce ecosystem conversion and $\mathsf { C H } _ { 4 }$ and ${ \Nu } _ { 2 } 0$ emissions, and free up land for reforestation and ecosystem restoration. Sustainably sourced agriculture and forest products, including long-lived wood products, can be used instead of more GHG-intensive products in other sectors. Effective adaptation options include cultivar improvements, agroforestry, community-based adaptation, farm and landscape diversification, and urban agriculture. These AFOLU response options require integration of biophysical, socioeconomic and other enabling factors. The effectiveness of ecosystem-based adaptation and most water-related adaptation options declines with increasing warming (see 3.2). (high confidence) {WGII SPM C.2.1, WGII SPM C.2.2, WGII SPM C.2.5; WGIII SPM C.9.1; SRCCL SPM B.1.1, SRCCL SPM B.5.4, SRCCL SPM D.1; SROCC SPM C}

by protection, restoration, precautionary ecosystem-based management of renewable resource use, and the reduction of pollution and other stressors (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2.4, WGII SPM D.4; SROCC SPM C.2}

Large-scale land conversion for bioenergy, biochar, or afforestation can increase risks to biodiversity, water and food security. In contrast, restoring natural forests and drained peatlands, and improving sustainability of managed forests enhances the resilience of carbon stocks and sinks and reduces ecosystem vulnerability to climate change. Cooperation, and inclusive decision making, with local communities and Indigenous Peoples, as well as recognition of inherent rights of Indigenous Peoples, is integral to successful adaptation across forests and other ecosystems. (high confidence) {WGII SPM B.5.4, WGII SPM C.2.3, WGII SPM C.2.4; WGIII SPM D.2.3; SRCCL B.7.3, SRCCL SPM C.4.3, SRCCL TS.7}

Natural rivers, wetlands and upstream forests reduce flood risk in most circumstances (high confidence). Enhancing natural water retention such as by restoring wetlands and rivers, land use planning such as no build zones or upstream forest management, can further reduce flood risk (medium confidence). For inland flooding, combinations of non-structural measures like early warning systems and structural measures like levees have reduced loss of lives (medium confidence), but hard defences against flooding or sea level rise can also be maladaptive (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2.1, WGII SPM C.4.1, WGII SPM C.4.2, WGII SPM C.2.5}

Protection and restoration of coastal ‘blue carbon’ ecosystems (e.g., mangroves, tidal marshes and seagrass meadows) could reduce emissions and/or increase carbon uptake and storage (medium confidence). Coastal wetlands protect against coastal erosion and flooding (very high confidence). Strengthening precautionary approaches, such as rebuilding overexploited or depleted fisheries, and responsiveness of existing fisheries management strategies reduces negative climate change impacts on fisheries, with benefits for regional economies and livelihoods (medium confidence). Ecosystem-based management in fisheries and aquaculture supports food security, biodiversity, human health and well-being (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2.2, WGII SPM C.2; SROCC SPM C2.3, SROCC SPM C.2.4}

Some options, such as conservation of high-carbon ecosystems (e.g., peatlands, wetlands, rangelands, mangroves and forests), have immediate impacts while others, such as restoration of high-carbon ecosystems, reclamation of degraded soils or afforestation, take decades to deliver measurable results (high confidence). Many sustainable land management technologies and practices are financially profitable in three to ten years (medium confidence). {SRCCL SPM B.1.2, SRCCL SPM D.2.2}

Maintaining the resilience of biodiversity and ecosystem services at a global scale depends on effective and equitable conservation of approximately $3 0 - 5 0 \%$ of Earth’s land, freshwater and ocean areas, including currently near-natural ecosystems (high confidence). The services and options provided by terrestrial, freshwater, coastal and ocean ecosystems can be supported

# 4.5.5. Health and Nutrition

Human health will benefit from integrated mitigation and adaptation options that mainstream health into food, infrastructure, social protection, and water policies (very high confidence). Balanced and sustainable healthy diets156 and reduced food loss and waste present important opportunities for adaptation and mitigation while generating significant co-benefits in terms of biodiversity and human health (high confidence). Public health policies to improve nutrition, such as increasing the diversity of food sources in public procurement, health insurance, financial incentives, and awareness-raising campaigns, can potentially influence food demand, reduce food waste, reduce healthcare costs, contribute to lower GHG emissions and enhance adaptive capacity (high confidence).