# Section 3

Projected adverse impacts and related losses and damages from climate change escalate with every increment of global warming (very high confidence), but they will also strongly depend on socio-economic development trajectories and adaptation actions to reduce vulnerability and exposure (high confidence). For example, development pathways with higher demand for food, animal feed, and water, more resource-intensive consumption and production, and limited technological improvements result in higher risks from water scarcity in drylands, land degradation and food insecurity (high confidence). Changes in, for example, demography or investments in health systems have effect on a variety of health-related outcomes including heat-related morbidity and mortality (Figure 3.3 Panel d). {WGII SPM B.3, WGII SPM B.4, WGII Figure SPM.3; SRCCL SPM A.6}

With every increment of warming, climate change impacts and risks will become increasingly complex and more difficult to manage. Many regions are projected to experience an increase in the probability of compound events with higher global warming, such as concurrent heatwaves and droughts, compound flooding and fire weather. In addition, multiple climatic and non-climatic risk drivers such as biodiversity loss or violent conflict will interact, resulting in compounding overall risk and risks cascading across sectors and regions. Furthermore, risks can arise from some responses that are intended to reduce the risks of climate change, e.g., adverse side effects of some emission reduction and carbon dioxide removal (CDR) measures (see 3.4.1). (high confidence) {WGI SPM C.2.7, WGI Figure SPM.6, WGI TS.4.3; WGII SPM B.1.7, WGII B.2.2, WGII SPM B.5, WGII SPM B.5.4, WGII SPM C.4.2, WGII SPM B.5, WGII CCB2}

Solar Radiation Modification (SRM) approaches, if they were to be implemented, introduce a widespread range of new risks to people and ecosystems, which are not well understood. SRM has the potential to offset warming within one or two decades and ameliorate some climate hazards but would not restore climate to a previous state, and substantial residual or overcompensating climate change would occur at regional and seasonal scales (high confidence). Effects of SRM would depend on the specific approach used122, and a sudden and sustained termination of SRM in a high ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions scenario would cause rapid climate change (high confidence). SRM would not stop atmospheric ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ concentrations from increasing nor reduce resulting ocean acidification under continued anthropogenic emissions (high confidence). Large uncertainties and knowledge gaps are associated with the potential of SRM approaches to reduce climate change risks. Lack of robust and formal SRM governance poses risks as deployment by a limited number of states could create international tensions. {WGI 4.6; WGII SPM B.5.5; WGIII 14.4.5.1; WGIII 14 Cross-Working Group Box Solar Radiation Modification; SR1.5 SPM C.1.4}