All global modelled pathways that limit warming to ${ \displaystyle 2 \% }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ or lower by 2100 involve reductions in both net $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions and non- ${ \bf { C } } { \bf { 0 } } _ { 2 }$ emissions (see Figure 3.6) (high confidence). For example, in pathways that limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 5 0 \% )$ with no or limited overshoot, global $\mathsf { C H } _ { 4 }$ (methane) emissions are reduced by 34 [21 to $5 7 ] \%$ below 2019 levels by 2030 and by 44 [31 to $6 3 ] \%$ in 2040 (high confidence). Global $\mathsf { C H } _ { 4 }$ emissions are reduced by 24 [9 to $5 3 \%$ below 2019 levels by 2030 and by 37 [20 to $6 0 \%$ in 2040 in modelled pathways that limit warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ with action starting in 2020 $( > 6 7 \% )$ (high confidence). {WGIII SPM C1.2, WGIII Table SPM.2, WGIII 3.3; SR1.5 SPM C.1, SR1.5 SPM C.1.2} (Cross-Section Box.2)

All global modelled pathways that limit warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } \left( > 6 7 \% \right)$ or lower by 2100 involve GHG emission reductions in all sectors (high confidence). The contributions of different sectors vary across modelled mitigation pathways. In most global modelled mitigation pathways, emissions from land-use, land-use change and forestry, via reforestation and reduced deforestation, and from the energy supply sector reach net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions earlier than the buildings, industry and transport sectors (Figure 4.1). Strategies can rely on combinations of different options (Figure 4.1, Section 4.5), but doing less in one sector needs to be compensated by further reductions in other sectors if warming is to be limited. (high confidence) {WGIII SPM C.3, WGIII SPM C.3.1, WGIII SPM 3.2, WGIII SPM C.3.3} (Cross-Section Box.2)

Without rapid, deep and sustained mitigation and accelerated adaptation actions, losses and damages will continue to increase, including projected adverse impacts in Africa, LDCs, SIDS, Central and South America147, Asia and the Arctic, and will disproportionately affect the most vulnerable populations (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.3.5, WGII SPM B.2.4, WGII 12.2, WGII 10. Box 10.6, WGII TS D.7.5, WGII Cross-Chapter Box 6 ES, WGII Global to Regional Atlas Annex A1.15, WGII Global to Regional Atlas Annex A1.27; SR1.5 SPM B.5.3, SR 1.5 SPM B.5.7; SRCCL A.5.6} (Figure 3.2; Figure 3.3)