# Section 3

# 3.4 Long-Term Interactions Between Adaptation, Mitigation and Sustainable Development

Mitigation and adaptation can lead to synergies and trade-offs with sustainable development (high confidence). Accelerated and equitable mitigation and adaptation bring benefits from avoiding damages from climate change and are critical to achieving sustainable development (high confidence). Climate resilient development138 pathways are progressively constrained by every increment of further warming (very high confidence). There is a rapidly closing window of opportunity to secure a liveable and sustainable future for all (very high confidence).

# 3.4.1 Synergies and trade-offs, costs and benefits

Mitigation and adaptation options can lead to synergies and trade-offs with other aspects of sustainable development (see also Section 4.6, Figure 4.4). Synergies and trade-offs depend on the pace and magnitude of changes and the development context including inequalities, with consideration of climate justice. The potential or effectiveness of some adaptation and mitigation options decreases as climate change intensifies (see also Sections 3.2, 3.3.3, 4.5). (high confidence) {WGII SPM C.2, WGII Figure SPM.4b; WGIII SPM D.1, WGIII SPM D.1.2, WGIII TS.5.1, WGIII Figure SPM.8; SR1.5 SPM D.3, SR1.5 SPM D.4; SRCCL SPM B.2, SRCCL SPM B.3, SRCCL SPM D.3.2, SRCCL Figure SPM.3}

In the energy sector, transitions to low-emission systems will have multiple co-benefits, including improvements in air quality and health. There are potential synergies between sustainable development and, for instance, energy efficiency and renewable energy. (high confidence) {WGIII SPM C.4.2, WGIII SPM D.1.3}

For agriculture, land, and food systems, many land management options and demand-side response options (e.g., dietary choices, reduced post-harvest losses, reduced food waste) can contribute to eradicating poverty and eliminating hunger while promoting good health and well-being, clean water and sanitation, and life on land (medium confidence). In contrast, certain adaptation options that promote intensification of production, such as irrigation, may have negative effects on sustainability (e.g., for biodiversity, ecosystem services, groundwater depletion, and water quality) (high confidence). {WGII TS.D.5.5; WGIII SPM D.10; SRCCL SPM B.2.3}

Reforestation, improved forest management, soil carbon sequestration, peatland restoration and coastal blue carbon management are examples of CDR methods that can enhance biodiversity and ecosystem functions, employment and local livelihoods, depending on context139. However, afforestation or production of biomass crops for bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture and storage or biochar can have adverse socio-economic and environmental impacts, including on biodiversity, food and water security, local livelihoods and the rights of Indigenous Peoples, especially if implemented at large scales and where land tenure is insecure. (high confidence) {WGII SPM B.5.4, WGII SPM C.2.4; WGIII SPM C.11.2; SR1.5 SPM C.3.4, SR1.5 SPM C.3.5; SRCCL SPM B.3, SRCCL SPM B.7.3, SRCCL Figure SPM.3}

Modelled pathways that assume using resources more efficiently or shift global development towards sustainability include fewer challenges, such as dependence on CDR and pressure on land and biodiversity, and have the most pronounced synergies with respect to sustainable development (high confidence). {WGIII SPM C.3.6; SR1.5 SPM D.4.2}

Strengthening climate change mitigation action entails more rapid transitions and higher up-front investments, but brings benefits from avoiding damages from climate change and reduced adaptation costs. The aggregate effects of climate change mitigation on global GDP (excluding damages from climate change and adaptation costs) are small compared to global projected GDP growth. Projected estimates of global aggregate net economic damages and the costs of adaptation generally increase with global warming level. (high confidence) {WGII SPM B.4.6, WGII TS.C.10; WGIII SPM C.12.2, WGIII SPM C.12.3}

Cost-benefit analysis remains limited in its ability to represent all damages from climate change, including non-monetary damages, or to capture the heterogeneous nature of damages and the risk of catastrophic damages (high confidence). Even without accounting for these factors or for the co-benefits of mitigation, the global benefits of limiting warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ exceed the cost of mitigation (medium confidence). This finding is robust against a wide range of assumptions about social preferences on inequalities and discounting over time (medium confidence). Limiting global warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ instead of $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ would increase the costs of mitigation, but also increase the benefits in terms of reduced impacts and related risks (see 3.1.1, 3.1.2) and reduced adaptation needs (high confidence) 140. {WGII SPM B.4, WGII SPM B.6; WGIII SPM C.12, WGIII SPM C.12.2, WGIII SPM C.12.3 WGIII Box TS.7; SR1.5 SPM B.3, SR1.5 SPM B.5, SR1.5 SPM B.6}

Considering other sustainable development dimensions, such as the potentially strong economic benefits on human health from air quality improvement, may enhance the estimated benefits of mitigation (medium confidence). The economic effects of strengthened mitigation action vary across regions and countries, depending notably on economic structure, regional emissions reductions, policy design and level of international cooperation (high confidence). Ambitious mitigation pathways imply large and sometimes disruptive changes in economic structure, with implications for near-term actions (Section 4.2), equity (Section 4.4), sustainability (Section 4.6), and finance (Section 4.8) (high confidence). {WGIII SPM C.12.2, WGIII SPM D.3.2, WGIII TS.4.2}