Table SPM.1: Greenhouse gas and ${ \mathsf { C } } { \mathsf { O } } _ { 2 }$ emission reductions from 2019, median and 5-95 percentiles. {3.3.1, 4.1, Table 3.1, Figure 2.5, Box SPM.1}   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="5">Reductions from 2019 emission levels (%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2030</td><td>2035</td><td>2040</td><td>2050</td></tr><tr><td>Limit warming to1.5°C (>50%) with no or</td><td>GHG</td><td>43 [34-60]</td><td>60 [49-77]</td><td>69[58-90]</td><td>84[73-98]</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">limited overshoot</td><td></td><td>48 [36-69]</td><td>65[50-96]</td><td>80[61-109]</td><td>99 [79-119]</td></tr><tr><td>GHG</td><td>21 [1-42]</td><td>35 [22-55]</td><td>46 [34-63]</td><td>64 [53-77]</td></tr><tr><td>Limit warming to 2°C (>67%)</td><td>CO2</td><td>22 [1-44]</td><td>37[21-59]</td><td>51[36-70]</td><td>73 [55-90]</td></tr></table></body></html>

B.6.2 Reaching net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ or GHG emissions primarily requires deep and rapid reductions in gross emissions of $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 } ,$ as well as substantial reductions of non- $\cdot ( 0 _ { 2 }$ GHG emissions (high confidence). For example, in modelled pathways that limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } \left( > 5 0 \% \right)$ with no or limited overshoot, global methane emissions are reduced by $3 4 [ 2 1 - 5 7 ] \%$ by 2030 relative to 2019. However, some hard-to-abate residual GHG emissions (e.g., some emissions from agriculture, aviation, shipping, and industrial processes) remain and would need to be counterbalanced by deployment of CDR methods to achieve net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ or GHG emissions (high confidence). As a result, net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ is reached earlier than net zero GHGs (high confidence). {3.3.2, 3.3.3, Table 3.1, Figure 3.5} (Figure SPM.5)

B.6.3 Global modelled mitigation pathways reaching net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ and GHG emissions include transitioning from fossil fuels without carbon capture and storage (CCS) to very low- or zero-carbon energy sources, such as renewables or fossil fuels with CCS, demand-side measures and improving efficiency, reducing non- $\cdot ( 0 _ { 2 }$ GHG emissions, and $\mathsf { C D R } ^ { 4 7 }$ . In most global modelled pathways, land-use change and forestry (via reforestation and reduced deforestation) and the energy supply sector reach net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions earlier than the buildings, industry and transport sectors. (high confidence) {3.3.3, 4.1, 4.5, Figure $4 . 1 \}$ (Figure SPM.5, Box SPM.1)

B.6.4 Mitigation options often have synergies with other aspects of sustainable development, but some options can also have trade-offs. There are potential synergies between sustainable development and, for instance, energy efficiency and renewable energy. Similarly, depending on the context48, biological CDR methods like reforestation, improved forest management, soil carbon sequestration, peatland restoration and coastal blue carbon management can enhance biodiversity and ecosystem functions, employment and local livelihoods. However, afforestation or production of biomass crops can have adverse socio-economic and environmental impacts, including on biodiversity, food and water security, local livelihoods and the rights of Indigenous Peoples, especially if implemented at large scales and where land tenure is insecure. Modelled pathways that assume using resources more efficiently or that shift global development towards sustainability include fewer challenges, such as less dependence on CDR and pressure on land and biodiversity. (high confidence) {3.4.1}