# 4.4 Equity and Inclusion in Climate Change Action

Actions that prioritise equity, climate justice, social justice and inclusion lead to more sustainable outcomes, co-benefits, reduce trade-offs, support transformative change and advance climate resilient development. Adaptation responses are immediately needed to reduce rising climate risks, especially for the most vulnerable. Equity, inclusion and just transitions are key to progress on adaptation and deeper societal ambitions for accelerated mitigation. (high confidence)

Adaptation and mitigation actions, across scales, sectors and regions, that prioritise equity, climate justice, rights-based approaches, social justice and inclusivity, lead to more sustainable outcomes, reduce trade-offs, support transformative change and advance climate resilient development (high confidence). Redistributive policies across sectors and regions that shield the poor and vulnerable, social safety nets, equity, inclusion and just transitions, at all scales can enable deeper societal ambitions and resolve trade-offs with sustainable development goals.(SDGs), particularly education, hunger, poverty, gender and energy access (high confidence). Mitigation efforts embedded within the wider development context can increase the pace, depth and breadth of emission reductions (medium confidence). Equity, inclusion and just transitions at all scales enable deeper societal ambitions for accelerated mitigation, and climate action more broadly (high confidence). The complexity in risk of rising food prices, reduced household incomes, and health and climate-related malnutrition (particularly maternal malnutrition and child undernutrition) and mortality increases with little or low levels of adaptation (high confidence). {WGII SPM B.5.1, WGII SPM C.2.9, WGII SPM D.2.1, WGII TS Box TS.4; WGIII SPM D.3, WGIII SPM D.3.3, WGIII SPM WGIII SPM E.3, SR1.5 SPM D.4.5} (Figure 4.3c)

Regions and people with considerable development constraints have high vulnerability to climatic hazards. Adaptation outcomes for the most vulnerable within and across countries and regions are enhanced through approaches focusing on equity, inclusivity, and rights-based approaches, including 3.3 to 3.6 billion people living in contexts that are highly vulnerable to climate change (high confidence). Vulnerability is higher in locations with poverty, governance challenges and limited access to basic services and resources, violent conflict and high levels of climate-sensitive livelihoods (e.g., smallholder farmers, pastoralists, fishing communities) (high confidence). Several risks can be moderated with adaptation (high confidence). The largest adaptation gaps exist among lower income population groups (high confidence) and adaptation progress is unevenly distributed with observed adaptation gaps (high confidence). Present development challenges causing high vulnerability are influenced by historical and ongoing patterns of inequity such as colonialism, especially for many Indigenous Peoples and local communities (high confidence). Vulnerability is exacerbated by inequity and marginalisation linked to gender, ethnicity, low income or combinations thereof, especially for many Indigenous Peoples and local communities (high confidence). {WGII SPM B.2, WGII SPM B.2.4, WGII SPM B.3.2, WGII SPM B.3.3, WGII SPM C.1, WGII SPM C.1.2, WGII SPM C.2.9}

Meaningful participation and inclusive planning, informed by cultural values, Indigenous Knowledge, local knowledge, and scientific knowledge can help address adaptation gaps and avoid maladaptation (high confidence). Such actions with flexible pathways may encourage low-regret and timely actions (very high confidence). Integrating climate adaptation into social protection programmes, including cash transfers and public works programmes, would increase resilience to climate change, especially when supported by basic services and infrastructure (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2.3, WGII SPM C.4.3, WGII SPM C.4.4, WGII SPM C.2.9, WGII WPM D.3}

Equity, inclusion, just transitions, broad and meaningful participation of all relevant actors in decision making at all scales enable deeper societal ambitions for accelerated mitigation, and climate action more broadly, and build social trust, support transformative changes and an equitable sharing of benefits and burdens (high confidence). Equity remains a central element in the UN climate regime, notwithstanding shifts in differentiation between states over time and challenges in assessing fair shares. Ambitious mitigation pathways imply large and sometimes disruptive changes in economic structure, with significant distributional consequences, within and between countries, including shifting of income and employment during the transition from high to low emissions activities (high confidence). While some jobs may be lost, low-emissions development can also open up opportunities to enhance skills and create jobs (high confidence). Broadening equitable access to finance, technologies and governance that facilitate mitigation, and consideration of climate justice can help equitable sharing of benefits