public. From 2010 to 2019 there have been sustained decreases in the unit costs of solar energy $( 8 5 \% )$ , wind energy $( 5 5 \% ) _ { i }$ , and lithium-ion batteries $( 8 5 \% )$ , and large increases in their deployment, e.g., ${ \tt > } 1 0 \times$ for solar and ${ \tt > } 1 0 0 \times$ for electric vehicles (EVs), varying widely across regions. The mix of policy instruments that reduced costs and stimulated adoption includes public R&D, funding for demonstration and pilot projects, and demand-pull instruments such as deployment subsidies to attain scale. Maintaining emission-intensive systems may, in some regions and sectors, be more expensive than transitioning to low emission systems. (high confidence) {2.2.2, Figure 2.4}

A.4.3 A substantial ‘emissions gap’ exists between global GHG emissions in 2030 associated with the implementation of NDCs announced prior to $\mathsf { C O P 2 6 ^ { 2 6 } }$ and those associated with modelled mitigation pathways that limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 5 0 \% )$ with no or limited overshoot or limit warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ ) assuming immediate action (high confidence). This would make it likely that warming will exceed $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ during the 21st century (high confidence). Global modelled mitigation pathways that limit warming to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 5 0 \% )$ with no or limited overshoot or limit warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ $( > 6 7 \% )$ assuming immediate action imply deep global GHG emissions reductions this decade (high confidence) (see SPM Box 1, Table $1 , 8 . 6 ) ^ { 2 7 }$ . Modelled pathways that are consistent with NDCs announced prior to COP26 until 2030 and assume no increase in ambition thereafter have higher emissions, leading to a median global warming of 2.8 [2.1 to 3.4] $^ \circ \mathsf { C }$ by 2100 (medium confidence). Many countries have signalled an intention to achieve net zero GHG or net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ by around mid-century but pledges differ across countries in terms of scope and specificity, and limited policies are to date in place to deliver on them. {2.3.1, Table 2.2, Figure 2.5, Table 3.1, 4.1}

A.4.4 Policy coverage is uneven across sectors (high confidence). Policies implemented by the end of 2020 are projected to result in higher global GHG emissions in 2030 than emissions implied by NDCs, indicating an ‘implementation gap’ (high confidence). Without a strengthening of policies, global warming of 3.2 [2.2 to $3 . 5 ] ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ is projected by 2100 (medium confidence). {2.2.2, 2.3.1, 3.1.1, Figure 2.5} (Box SPM.1, Figure SPM.5)

A.4.5 The adoption of low-emission technologies lags in most developing countries, particularly least developed ones, due in part to limited finance, technology development and transfer, and capacity (medium confidence). The magnitude of climate finance flows has increased over the last decade and financing channels have broadened but growth has slowed since 2018 (high confidence). Financial flows have developed heterogeneously across regions and sectors (high confidence). Public and private finance flows for fossil fuels are still greater than those for climate adaptation and mitigation (high confidence). The overwhelming majority of tracked climate finance is directed towards mitigation, but nevertheless falls short of the levels needed to limit warming to below $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ or to $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ across all sectors and regions (see C7.2) (very high confidence). In 2018, public and publicly mobilised private climate finance flows from developed to developing countries were below the collective goal under the UNFCCC and Paris Agreement to mobilise USD 100 billion per year by 2020 in the context of meaningful mitigation action and transparency on implementation (medium confidence). {2.2.2, 2.3.1, 2.3.3}