# Section 2

# Section 2: Current Status and Trends

# 2.1 Observed Changes, Impacts and Attribution

Human activities, principally through emissions of greenhouse gases, have unequivocally caused global warming, with global surface temperature reaching $1 . 1 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ above 1850–1900 in 2011–2020. Global greenhouse gas emissions have continued to increase over 2010–2019, with unequal historical and ongoing contributions arising from unsustainable energy use, land use and land-use change, lifestyles and patterns of consumption and production across regions, between and within countries, and between individuals (high confidence). Human-caused climate change is already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region across the globe. This has led to widespread adverse impacts on food and water security, human health and on economies and society and related losses and damages63 to nature and people (high confidence). Vulnerable communities who have historically contributed the least to current climate change are disproportionately affected (high confidence).

# 2.1.1. Observed Warming and its Causes

Global surface temperature was around $1 . 1 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ above 1850–1900 in 2011–2020 (1.09 [0.95 to $1 . 2 0 ] ^ { \circ } \mathbf { C } ) ^ { 6 4 }$ , with larger increases over land (1.59 [1.34 to $1 . 8 3 ] ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } )$ than over the ocean (0.88 [0.68 to $1 . 0 1 1 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ) ^ { 6 5 }$ . Observed warming is human-caused, with warming from greenhouse gases (GHG), dominated by $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ and methane $( C H _ { 4 } ) _ { i }$ , partly masked by aerosol cooling (Figure 2.1). Global surface temperature in the first two decades of the 21st century (2001–2020) was 0.99 [0.84 to $1 . 1 0 ] ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ higher than 1850–1900. Global surface temperature has increased faster since 1970 than in any other 50-year period over at least the last 2000 years (high confidence). The likely range of total human-caused global surface temperature increase from 1850–1900 to $2 0 1 0 { - } 2 0 1 9 ^ { 6 6 }$ is $0 . 8 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ to $1 . 3 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ,$ with a best estimate of $1 . 0 7 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ . It is likely that well-mixed $\mathsf { G H G S } ^ { 6 7 }$ contributed a warming of $1 . 0 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ to $2 . 0 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ,$ and other human drivers (principally aerosols) contributed a cooling of $0 . 0 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ to $0 . 8 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C } ,$ natural (solar and volcanic) drivers changed global surface temperature by $\pm 0 . 1 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ and internal variability changed it by $\pm 0 . 2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ . {WGI SPM A.1, WGI SPM A.1.2, WGI SPM A.1.3, WGI SPM A.2.2, WGI Figure SPM.2; SRCCL TS.2}

Observed increases in well-mixed GHG concentrations since around 1750 are unequivocally caused by GHG emissions from human activities. Land and ocean sinks have taken up a near-constant proportion (globally about $56 \%$ per year) of ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions from human activities over the past six decades, with regional differences (high confidence). In 2019, atmospheric ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ concentrations reached 410 parts per million (ppm), $\mathsf { C H } _ { 4 }$ reached 1866 parts per billion (ppb) and nitrous oxide $( \mathsf { N } _ { 2 } 0 )$ reached $3 3 2 { \mathsf { p p b } } ^ { 6 8 }$ . Other major contributors to warming are tropospheric ozone $\left( 0 _ { 3 } \right)$ and halogenated gases. Concentrations of $\mathsf { C H } _ { 4 }$ and ${ \sf N } _ { 2 } 0$ have increased to levels unprecedented in at least 800,000 years (very high confidence), and there is high confidence that current ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ concentrations are higher than at any time over at least the past two million years. Since 1750, increases in ${ \mathsf { C } } { \mathsf { 0 } } _ { 2 }$ $( 4 7 \% )$ and $\mathsf { C H } _ { 4 }$ $( 1 5 6 \% )$ concentrations far exceed – and increases in ${ \Nu } _ { 2 } 0$ $( 2 3 \% )$ are similar to – the natural multi-millennial changes between glacial and interglacial periods over at least the past 800,000 years (very high confidence). The net cooling effect which arises from anthropogenic aerosols peaked in the late 20th century (high confidence). {WGI SPM A1.1, WGI SPM A1.3, WGI SPM A.2.1, WGI Figure SPM.2, WGI TS 2.2, WGI 2ES, WGI Figure 6.1}