# 4.2 Benefits of Strengthening Near-Term Action

Accelerated implementation of adaptation will improve well-being by reducing losses and damages, especially for vulnerable populations. Deep, rapid, and sustained mitigation actions would reduce future adaptation costs and losses and damages, enhance sustainable development co-benefits, avoid locking-in emission sources, and reduce stranded assets and irreversible climate changes. These near-term actions involve higher up-front investments and disruptive changes, which can be moderated by a range of enabling conditions and removal or reduction of barriers to feasibility. (high confidence)

Accelerated implementation of adaptation responses will bring benefits to human well-being (high confidence) (Section 4.3).  As adaptation options often have long implementation times, long-term planning and accelerated implementation, particularly in this decade, is important to close adaptation gaps, recognising that constraints remain for some regions. The benefits to vulnerable populations would be high (see Section 4.4). (high confidence) {WGI SPM B.1, WGI SPM B.1.3, WGI SPM B.2.2, WGI SPM B.3; WGII SPM C.1.1, WGII SPM C.1.2, WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.3.1, WGII Figure SPM.4b; SROCC SPM C.3.4, SROCC Figure 3.4, SROCC Figure SPM.5}

Near-term actions that limit global warming to close to $1 . 5 \%$ would substantially reduce projected losses and damages related to climate change in human systems and ecosystems, compared to higher warming levels, but cannot eliminate them all (very high confidence). The magnitude and rate of climate change and associated risks depend strongly on near-term mitigation and adaptation actions, and projected adverse impacts and related losses and damages escalate with every increment of global warming (very high confidence). Delayed mitigation action will further increase global warming which will decrease the effectiveness of many adaptation options, including Ecosystem-based Adaptation and many water-related options, as well as increasing mitigation feasibility risks, such as for options based on ecosystems (high confidence). Comprehensive, effective, and innovative responses integrating adaptation and mitigation can harness synergies and reduce trade-offs between adaptation and mitigation, as well as in meeting requirements for financing (very high confidence) (see Section 4.5, 4.6, 4.8 and 4.9). {WGII SPM B.3, WGII SPM B.4, WGII SPM B.6.2, WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.3, WGII SPM D.1, WGII SPM D.4.3, WGII SPM D.5, WG II TS D.1.4, WG II TS.D.5, WGII TS D.7.5; WGIII SPM B.6.3,WGIII SPM B.6.4, WGIII SPM C.9, WGIII SPM D.2, WGIII SPM E.13; SR1.5 SPM C.2.7, SR1.5 D.1.3, SR1.5 D.5.2}

Mitigation actions will have other sustainable development co-benefits (high confidence). Mitigation will improve air quality and human health in the near term notably because many air pollutants are co-emitted by GHG emitting sectors and because methane emissions leads to surface ozone formation (high confidence). The benefits from air quality improvement include prevention of air pollution-related premature deaths, chronic diseases and damages to ecosystems and crops. The economic benefits for human health from air quality improvement arising from mitigation action can be of the same order of magnitude as mitigation costs, and potentially even larger (medium confidence). As methane has a short lifetime but is a potent GHG, strong, rapid and sustained reductions in methane emissions can limit near-term warming and improve air quality by reducing global surface ozone (high confidence). {WGI SPM D.1.7, WGI SPM D.2.2, WGI 6.7, WGI TS Box TS.7, WGI 6 Box 6.2, WGI Figure 6.3, WGI Figure 6.16, WGI Figure 6.17; WGII TS.D.8.3, WGII Cross-Chapter Box HEALTH, WGII 5 ES, WGII 7 ES; WGII 7.3.1.2; WGIII Figure SPM.8, WGIII SPM C.2.3, WGIII SPM C.4.2, WGIII TS.4.2}

Challenges from delayed adaptation and mitigation actions include the risk of cost escalation, lock-in of infrastructure, stranded assets, and reduced feasibility and effectiveness of adaptation and mitigation options (high confidence). The continued installation of unabated fossil fuel148 infrastructure will ‘lock-in’ GHG emissions (high confidence). Limiting global warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ or below will leave a substantial amount of fossil fuels unburned and could strand considerable fossil fuel infrastructure (high confidence), with globally discounted value projected to be around USD 1 to 4 trillion from 2015 to 2050 (medium confidence). Early actions would limit the size of these stranded assets, whereas delayed actions with continued investments in unabated high-emitting infrastructure and limited development and deployment of low-emitting alternatives prior to 2030 would raise future stranded assets to the higher end of the range – thereby acting as barriers and increasing political economy feasibility risks that may jeopardise efforts to limit global warming. (high confidence). {WGIII SPM B.6.3, WGIII SPM C.4, WGIII Box TS.8}