# B. Future Climate Change, Risks, and Long-Term Responses

# Future Climate Change

B.1 Continued greenhouse gas emissions will lead to increasing global warming, with the best estimate of reaching $1 . 5 \textdegree$ in the near term in considered scenarios and modelled pathways. Every increment of global warming will intensify multiple and concurrent hazards (high confidence). Deep, rapid, and sustained reductions in greenhouse gas emissions would lead to a discernible slowdown in global warming within around two decades, and also to discernible changes in atmospheric composition within a few years (high confidence). {Cross-Section Boxes 1 and 2, 3.1, 3.3, Table 3.1, Figure 3.1, 4.3} (Figure SPM.2, Box SPM.1)

B.1.1 Global warming28 will continue to increase in the near term (2021–2040) mainly due to increased cumulative ${ \mathsf { C } } { \mathsf { 0 } } _ { 2 }$ emissions in nearly all considered scenarios and modelled pathways. In the near term, global warming is more likely than not to reach $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ even under the very low GHG emission scenario (SSP1-1.9) and likely or very likely to exceed $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ under higher emissions scenarios. In the considered scenarios and modelled pathways, the best estimates of the time when the level of global warming of $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ is reached lie in the near term29. Global warming declines back to below $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ by the end of the 21st century in some scenarios and modelled pathways (see B.7). The assessed climate response to GHG emissions scenarios results in a best estimate of warming for 2081–2100 that spans a range from $1 . 4 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ for a very low GHG emissions scenario (SSP1-1.9) to $2 . 7 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ for an intermediate GHG emissions scenario (SSP2-4.5) and $4 . 4 ^ { \circ } \mathsf C$ for a very high GHG emissions scenario (SSP5-8.5)30, with narrower uncertainty ranges31 than for corresponding scenarios in AR5. {Cross-Section Boxes 1 and 2, 3.1.1, 3.3.4, Table 3.1, 4.3} (Box SPM.1)

B.1.2 Discernible differences in trends of global surface temperature between contrasting GHG emissions scenarios (SSP1-1.9 and SSP1-2.6 vs. SSP3-7.0 and SSP5-8.5) would begin to emerge from natural variability32 within around 20 years. Under these contrasting scenarios, discernible effects would emerge within years for GHG concentrations, and sooner for air quality improvements, due to the combined targeted air pollution controls and strong and sustained methane emissions reductions. Targeted reductions of air pollutant emissions lead to more rapid improvements in air quality within years compared to reductions in GHG emissions only, but in the long term, further improvements are projected in scenarios that combine efforts to reduce air pollutants as well as GHG emissions33. (high confidence) {3.1.1} (Box SPM.1)

B.1.3 Continued emissions will further affect all major climate system components. With every additional increment of global warming, changes in extremes continue to become larger. Continued global warming is projected to further intensify the global water cycle, including its variability, global monsoon precipitation, and very wet and very dry weather and