Many countries have signalled an intention to achieve net zero GHG or net zero ${ \bf { C } } { \bf { 0 } } _ { 2 }$ emissions by around mid-century (Cross-Section Box.1). More than 100 countries have either adopted, announced or are discussing net zero GHG or net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions commitments, covering more than two-thirds of global GHG emissions. A growing number of cities are setting climate targets, including net zero GHG targets. Many companies and institutions have also announced net zero emissions targets in recent years. The various net zero emission pledges differ across countries in terms of scope and specificity, and limited policies are to date in place to deliver on them. {WGIII SPM C.6.4, WGIII TS.4.1, WGIII Table TS.1, WGIII 13.9, WGIII 14.3, WGIII 14.5}

All mitigation strategies face implementation challenges, including technology risks, scaling, and costs (high confidence). Almost all mitigation options also face institutional barriers that need to be addressed to enable their application at scale (medium confidence). Current development pathways may create behavioural, spatial, economic and social barriers to accelerated mitigation at all scales (high confidence). Choices made by policymakers, citizens, the private sector and other stakeholders influence societies’ development pathways (high confidence). Structural factors of national circumstances and capabilities (e.g., economic and natural endowments, political systems and cultural factors and gender considerations) affect the breadth and depth of climate governance (medium confidence). The extent to which civil society actors, political actors, businesses, youth, labour, media, Indigenous Peoples, and local communities are engaged influences political support for climate change mitigation and eventual policy outcomes (medium confidence). {WGIII SPM C.3.6, WGIII SPM E.1.1, WGIII SPM E.2.1, WGIII SPM E.3.3}

The adoption of low-emission technologies lags in most developing countries, particularly least developed ones, due in part to weaker enabling conditions, including limited finance, technology development and transfer, and capacity (medium confidence). In many countries, especially those with limited institutional capacity, several adverse side-effects have been observed as a result of diffusion of low-emission technology, e.g., low-value employment, and dependency on foreign knowledge and suppliers (medium confidence). Low-emission innovation along with strengthened enabling conditions can reinforce development benefits, which can, in turn, create feedbacks towards greater public support for policy (medium confidence). Persistent and region-specific barriers also continue to hamper the economic and political feasibility of deploying AFOLU mitigation options (medium confidence). Barriers to implementation of AFOLU mitigation include insufficient institutional and financial support, uncertainty over long-term additionality and trade-offs, weak governance, insecure land ownership, low incomes and the lack of access to alternative sources of income, and the risk of reversal (high confidence). {WGIII SPM B.4.2, WGIII SPM C.9.1, WGIII SPM C.9.3}

# 2.3.2. Adaptation Gaps and Barriers

Despite progress, adaptation gaps exist between current levels of adaptation and levels needed to respond to impacts and reduce climate risks (high confidence). While progress in adaptation implementation is observed across all sectors and regions (very high confidence), many adaptation initiatives prioritise immediate and near-term climate risk reduction, e.g., through hard flood protection, which reduces the opportunity for transformational adaptation99 (high confidence). Most observed adaptation is fragmented, small in scale, incremental, sector-specific, and focused more on planning rather than implementation (high confidence). Further, observed adaptation is unequally distributed across regions and the largest adaptation gaps exist among lower population income groups (high confidence). In the urban context, the largest adaptation gaps exist in projects that manage complex risks, for example in the food–energy–water–health nexus or the inter-relationships of air quality and climate risk (high confidence). Many funding, knowledge and practice gaps remain for effective implementation, monitoring and evaluation and current adaptation efforts are not expected to meet existing goals (high confidence). At current rates of adaptation planning and implementation the adaptation gap will continue to grow (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.1, WGII SPM C.1.2, WGII SPM C.4.1, WGII TS.D.1.3, WGII TS.D.1.4}

Soft and hard adaptation limits100 have already been reached in some sectors and regions, in spite of adaptation having buffered some climate impacts (high confidence). Ecosystems already reaching hard adaptation limits include some warm water coral reefs, some coastal wetlands, some rainforests, and some polar and mountain ecosystems (high confidence). Individuals and households in low lying coastal areas in Australasia and Small Islands and smallholder farmers in Central and South America, Africa, Europe and Asia have reached soft limits (medium confidence), resulting from financial, governance, institutional and policy constraints and can be overcome by addressing these constraints (high confidence). Transitioning from incremental to transformational adaptation can help overcome soft adaptation limits (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.3, WGII SPM C.3.1, WGII SPM C.3.2, WGII SPM C.3.3, WGII SPM.C.3.4, WGII 16 ES}

Adaptation does not prevent all losses and damages, even with effective adaptation and before reaching soft and hard limits. Losses and damages are unequally distributed across systems, regions and sectors and are not comprehensively addressed by current financial, governance and institutional arrangements, particularly in vulnerable developing countries. (high confidence) {WGII SPM.C.3.5}

There is increased evidence of maladaptation101 in various sectors and regions. Examples of maladaptation are observed in urban areas (e.g., new urban infrastructure that cannot be adjusted easily or affordably), agriculture (e.g., using high-cost irrigation in areas projected to have more intense drought conditions), ecosystems (e.g. fire suppression in naturally