(high confidence) (Figure 2.3). Climate change impacts on health are mediated through natural and human systems, including economic and social conditions and disruptions (high confidence). Climate and weather extremes are increasingly driving displacement in Africa, Asia, North America (high confidence), and Central and South America (medium confidence) (Figure 2.3), with small island states in the Caribbean and South Pacific being disproportionately affected relative to their small population size (high confidence). Through displacement and involuntary migration from extreme weather and climate events, climate change has generated and perpetuated vulnerability (medium confidence). {WGII SPM B.1.4, WGII SPM B.1.7}

Human influence has likely increased the chance of compound extreme events80 since the 1950s. Concurrent and repeated climate hazards have occurred in all regions, increasing impacts and risks to health, ecosystems, infrastructure, livelihoods and food (high confidence). Compound extreme events include increases in the frequency of concurrent heatwaves and droughts (high confidence); fire weather in some regions (medium confidence); and compound flooding in some locations (medium confidence). Multiple risks interact, generating new sources of vulnerability to climate hazards, and compounding overall risk (high confidence). Compound climate hazards can overwhelm adaptive capacity and substantially increase damage (high confidence)). {WGI SPM A.3.5; WGII SPM. B.5.1, WGII TS.C.11.3}

Economic impacts attributable to climate change are increasingly affecting peoples’ livelihoods and are causing economic and societal impacts across national boundaries (high confidence). Economic damages from climate change have been detected in climate-exposed sectors, with regional effects to agriculture, forestry, fishery, energy, and tourism, and through outdoor labour productivity (high confidence) with some exceptions of positive impacts in regions with low energy demand and comparative advantages in agricultural markets and tourism (high confidence). Individual livelihoods have been affected through changes in agricultural productivity, impacts on human health and food security, destruction of homes and infrastructure, and loss of property and income, with adverse effects on gender and social equity (high confidence). Tropical cyclones have reduced economic growth in the short-term (high confidence). Event attribution studies and physical understanding indicate that human-caused climate change increases heavy precipitation associated with tropical cyclones (high confidence). Wildfires in many regions have affected built assets, economic activity, and health (medium to high confidence). In cities and settlements, climate impacts to key infrastructure are leading to losses and damages across water and food systems, and affect economic activity, with impacts extending beyond the area directly impacted by the climate hazard (high confidence). {WGI SPM A.3.4; WGII SPM B.1.6, WGII SPM B.5.2, WGII SPM B.5.3}

Climate change has caused widespread adverse impacts and related losses and damages to nature and people (high confidence). Losses and damages are unequally distributed across systems, regions and sectors (high confidence). Cultural losses, related to tangible and intangible heritage, threaten adaptive capacity and may result in irrevocable losses of sense of belonging, valued cultural practices, identity and home, particularly for Indigenous Peoples and those more directly reliant on the environment for subsistence (medium confidence). For example, changes in snow cover, lake and river ice, and permafrost in many Arctic regions, are harming the livelihoods and cultural identity of Arctic residents including Indigenous populations (high confidence). Infrastructure, including transportation, water, sanitation and energy systems have been compromised by extreme and slow-onset events, with resulting economic losses, disruptions of services and impacts to well-being (high confidence). {WGII SPM B.1, WGII SPM B.1.2, WGII SPM.B.1.5, WGII SPM C.3.5, WGII TS.B.1.6; SROCC SPM A.7.1}

Across sectors and regions, the most vulnerable people and systems have been disproportionately affected by the impacts of climate change (high confidence). LDCs and SIDS who have much lower per capita emissions $1 . 7 \mathrm { t C } 0 _ { 2 }$ -eq, $4 . 6 \ : \mathrm { t C O } _ { 2 }$ -eq, respectively) than the global average $( 6 . 9 \ t C 0 _ { 2 }$ -eq) excluding ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ -LULUCF, also have high vulnerability to climatic hazards, with global hotspots of high human vulnerability observed in West-, Central- and East Africa, South Asia, Central and South America, SIDS and the Arctic (high confidence). Regions and people with considerable development constraints have high vulnerability to climatic hazards (high confidence). Vulnerability is higher in locations with poverty, governance challenges and limited access to basic services and resources, violent conflict and high levels of climate-sensitive livelihoods (e.g., smallholder farmers, pastoralists, fishing communities) (high confidence). Vulnerability at different spatial levels is exacerbated by inequity and marginalisation linked to gender, ethnicity, low income or combinations thereof (high confidence), especially for many Indigenous Peoples and local communities (high confidence). Approximately 3.3 to 3.6 billion people live in contexts that are highly vulnerable to climate change (high confidence). Between 2010 and 2020, human mortality from floods, droughts and storms was 15 times higher in highly vulnerable regions, compared to regions with very low vulnerability (high confidence). In the Arctic and in some high mountain regions, negative impacts of cryosphere change have been especially felt among Indigenous Peoples (high confidence). Human and ecosystem vulnerability are interdependent (high confidence). Vulnerability of ecosystems and people to climate change differs substantially among and within regions (very high confidence), driven by patterns of intersecting socio-economic development, unsustainable ocean and land use, inequity, marginalisation, historical and ongoing patterns of inequity such as colonialism, and governance81 (high confidence). {WGII SPM B.1, WGII SPM B.2, WGII SPM B.2.4; WGIII SPM B.3.1; SROCC SPM A.7.1, SROCC SPM A.7.2}