approaches (high confidence). There is no consistent evidence that current emission trading systems have led to significant emissions leakage (medium confidence). {WGIII SPM E4.2, WGIII SPM E.4.6}

Removing fossil fuel subsidies would reduce emissions, improve public revenue and macroeconomic performance, and yield other environmental and sustainable development benefits such as improved public revenue, macroeconomic and sustainability performance; subsidy removal can have adverse distributional impacts especially on the most economically vulnerable groups which, in some cases, can be mitigated by measures such as re-distributing revenue saved, and depend on national circumstances (high confidence). Fossil fuel subsidy removal is projected by various studies to reduce global ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions by $1 { - } 4 \%$ , and GHG emissions by up to $10 \%$ by 2030, varying across regions (medium confidence). {WGIII SPM E.4.2}

National policies to support technology development, and participation in international markets for emission reduction, can bring positive spillover effects for other countries (medium confidence), although reduced demand for fossil fuels as a result of climate policy could result in costs to exporting countries (high confidence). Economy-wide packages can meet short-term economic goals while reducing emissions and shifting development pathways towards sustainability (medium confidence). Examples are public spending commitments; pricing reforms; and investment in education and training, R&D and infrastructure (high confidence). Effective policy packages would be comprehensive in coverage, harnessed to a clear vision for change, balanced across objectives, aligned with specific technology and system needs, consistent in terms of design and tailored to national circumstances (high confidence). {WGIII SPM E4.4, WGIII SPM 4.5, WGIII SPM 4.6}

# 4.8 Strengthening the Response: Finance, International Cooperation and Technology

Finance, international cooperation and technology are critical enablers for accelerated climate action. If climate goals are to be achieved, both adaptation and mitigation financing would have to increase many-fold. There is sufficient global capital to close the global investment gaps but there are barriers to redirect capital to climate action. Barriers include institutional, regulatory and market access barriers, which can be reduced to address the needs and opportunities, economic vulnerability and indebtedness in many developing countries. Enhancing international cooperation is possible through multiple channels. Enhancing technology innovation systems is key to accelerate the widespread adoption of technologies and practices. (high confidence)

# 4.8.1. Finance for Mitigation and Adaptation Actions

Improved availability and access to finance157 will enable accelerated climate action (very high confidence). Addressing needs and gaps and broadening equitable access to domestic and international finance, when combined with other supportive actions, can act as a catalyst for accelerating mitigation and shifting development pathways (high confidence). Climate resilient development is enabled by increased international cooperation including improved access to financial resources, particularly for vulnerable regions, sectors and groups, and inclusive governance and coordinated policies (high confidence). Accelerated international financial cooperation is a critical enabler of low-GHG and just transitions, and can address inequities in access to finance and the costs of, and vulnerability to, the impacts of climate change (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.1.2, WGII SPM C.3.2, WGII SPM C.5, WGII SPM C.5.4, WGII SPM D.2, WGII SPM D.3.2, WGII SPM D.5, WGII SPM D.5.2; WGIII SPM B.4.2,WGIII SPM B.5, WGIII SPM B.5.4, WGIII SPM C.4.2, WGIII SPM C.7.3, WGIII SPM C.8.5, WGIII SPM D.1.2, WGIII SPM D.2.4, WGIII SPM D.3.4, WGIII SPM E.2.3, WGIII SPM E.3.1, WGIII SPM E.5, WGIII SPM E.5.1, WGIII SPM E.5.2, WGIII SPM E.5.3, WGIII SPM E.5.4, WGIII SPM E.6.2}

Both adaptation and mitigation finance need to increase many-fold, to address rising climate risks and to accelerate investments in emissions reduction (high confidence). Increased finance would address soft limits to adaptation and rising climate risks while also averting some related losses and damages, particularly in vulnerable developing countries (high confidence). Enhanced mobilisation of and access to finance, together with building capacity, are essential for implementation of adaptation actions and to reduce adaptation gaps given rising risks and costs, especially for the most vulnerable groups, regions and sectors (high confidence). Public finance is an important enabler of adaptation and mitigation, and can also leverage private finance (high confidence). Adaptation funding predominately comes from public sources, and public mechanisms and finance can leverage private sector finance by addressing real and perceived regulatory, cost and market barriers, for instance via public-private partnerships (high confidence). Financial and technological resources enable effective and ongoing implementation of adaptation, especially when supported by institutions with a strong understanding of adaptation needs and capacity (high confidence). Average annual modelled mitigation investment requirements for 2020 to 2030 in scenarios that limit warming to $2 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ or $1 . 5 ^ { \circ } \mathsf { C }$ are a factor of three to six greater than current levels, and total mitigation investments (public, private, domestic and international) would need to increase across all sectors and regions (medium confidence). Even if extensive global mitigation efforts are implemented, there will be a large need for financial, technical, and human resources for adaptation (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.1.2, WGII SPM C2.11, WGII SPM C.3, WGII SPM C.3.2, WGII SPM C3.5, WGII SPM C.5, WGII SPM C.5.4, WGII SPM D.1, WGII SPM D.1.1, WGII SPM D.1.2, WGII SPM C.5.4; WGIII SPM D.2.4, WGIII SPM E.5, WGIII SPM E.5.1, WGIII 15.2} (Section 2.3.2, 2.3.3, 4.4, Figure 4.6)