# Section 4

There is sufficient global capital and liquidity to close global investment gaps, given the size of the global financial system, but there are barriers to redirect capital to climate action both within and outside the global financial sector and in the context of economic vulnerabilities and indebtedness facing many developing countries (high confidence). For shifts in private finance, options include better assessment of climate-related risks and investment opportunities within the financial system, reducing sectoral and regional mismatches between available capital and investment needs, improving the risk-return profiles of climate investments, and developing institutional capacities and local capital markets. Macroeconomic barriers include, amongst others, indebtedness and economic vulnerability of developing regions. (high confidence) {WGII SPM C.5.4; WGIII SPM E.4.2, WGIII SPM E.5, WGIII SPM E.5.2, WGIII SPM E.5.3}

Scaling up financial flows requires clear signalling from governments and the international community (high confidence). Tracked financial flows fall short of the levels needed for adaptation and to achieve mitigation goals across all sectors and regions (high confidence). These gaps create many opportunities and the challenge of closing gaps is largest in developing countries (high confidence). This includes a stronger alignment of public finance, lowering real and perceived regulatory, cost and market barriers, and higher levels of public finance to lower the risks associated with low-emission investments. Up-front risks deter economically sound low carbon projects, and developing local capital markets are an option. Investors, financial intermediaries, central banks and financial regulators can shift the systemic underpricing of climate-related risks. A robust labelling of bonds and transparency is needed to attract savers. (high confidence) {WGII SPM C.5.4; WGIII SPM B.5.4, WGIII SPM E.4, WGIII SPM E.5.4, WGIII 15.2, WGIII 15.6.1, WGIII 15.6.2, WGIII 15.6.7}

The largest climate finance gaps and opportunities are in developing countries (high confidence). Accelerated support from developed countries and multilateral institutions is a critical enabler to enhance mitigation and adaptation action and can address inequities in finance, including its costs, terms and conditions, and economic vulnerability to climate change. Scaled-up public grants for mitigation and adaptation funding for vulnerable regions, e.g., in SubSaharan Africa, would be cost-effective and have high social returns in terms of access to basic energy. Options for scaling up mitigation and adaptation in developing regions include: increased levels of public finance and publicly mobilised private finance flows from developed to developing countries in the context of the USD 100 billion-a-year goal of the Paris Agreement; increase the use of public guarantees to reduce risks and leverage private flows at lower cost; local capital markets development; and building greater trust in international cooperation processes. A coordinated effort to make the postpandemic recovery sustainable over the long term through increased flows of financing over this decade can accelerate climate action, including in developing regions facing high debt costs, debt distress and macroeconomic uncertainty. (high confidence) {WGII SPM C.5.2, WGII SPM C.5.4, WGII SPM C.6.5, WGII SPM D.2, WGII TS.D.10.2; WGIII SPM E.5, WGIII SPM E.5.3, WGIII TS.6.4, WGIII Box TS.1, WGIII 15.2, WGIII 15.6}

# 4.8.2. International Cooperation and Coordination

International cooperation is a critical enabler for achieving ambitious climate change mitigation goals and climate resilient development (high confidence). Climate resilient development is enabled by increased international cooperation including mobilising and enhancing access to finance, particularly for developing countries, vulnerable regions, sectors and groups and aligning finance flows for climate action to be consistent with ambition levels and funding needs (high confidence). While agreed processes and goals, such as those in the UNFCCC, Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement, are helping (Section 2.2.1), international financial, technology and capacity building support to developing countries will enable greater implementation and more ambitious actions (medium confidence). By integrating equity and climate justice, national and international policies can help to facilitate shifting development pathways towards sustainability, especially by mobilising and enhancing access to finance for vulnerable regions, sectors and communities (high confidence). International cooperation and coordination, including combined policy packages, may be particularly important for sustainability transitions in emissionsintensive and highly traded basic materials industries that are exposed to international competition (high confidence). The large majority of emission modelling studies assume significant international cooperation to secure financial flows and address inequality and poverty issues in pathways limiting global warming. There are large variations in the modelled effects of mitigation on GDP across regions, depending notably on economic structure, regional emissions reductions, policy design and level of international cooperation (high confidence). Delayed global cooperation increases policy costs across regions (high confidence). {WGII SPM D.2, WGII SPM D.3.1, WGII SPM D.5.2; WGIII SPM D.3.4, WGIII SPM C5.4, WGIII SPM C.12.2, WGIII SPM E.6, WGIII SPM E.6.1, WGIII E.5.4, WGIII TS.4.2, WGIII TS.6.2; SR1.5 SPM D.6.3, SR1.5 SPM D.7, SR1.5 SPM D.7.3}

The transboundary nature of many climate change risks (e.g., for supply chains, markets and natural resource flows in food, fisheries, energy and water, and potential for conflict) increases the need for climate-informed transboundary management, cooperation, responses and solutions through multi-national or regional governance processes (high confidence). Multilateral governance efforts can help reconcile contested interests, world views and values about how to address climate change. International environment and sectoral agreements, and initiatives in some cases, may help to stimulate low GHG investment and reduce emissions (such as ozone depletion, transboundary air pollution and atmospheric emissions of mercury). Improvements to national and international governance structures would further enable the decarbonisation of shipping and aviation through deployment of low-emissions fuels, for example through stricter efficiency and carbon intensity standards. Transnational partnerships can also stimulate policy development, low-emissions technology diffusion, emission reductions and adaptation, by linking subnational and other actors, including cities, regions, non-governmental organisations and private sector entities, and by enhancing interactions between state and non-state actors, though uncertainties remain over their costs, feasibility, and effectiveness. International environmental and sectoral agreements, institutions, and initiatives are helping, and in some cases may help, to stimulate low GHG emissions investment and reduce emissions. (medium confidence) {WGII SPM B.5.3, WGII SPM C.5.6, WGII TS.E.5.4, WGII TS.E.5.5; WGIII SPM C.8.4, WGIII SPM E.6.3, WGIII SPM E.6.4, WGIII SPM E.6.4, WGIII TS.5.3}