# Section 2

Cross-Section Box.1: Understanding Net Zero $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ and Net Zero GHG Emissions

Limiting human-caused global warming to a specific level requires limiting cumulative $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions, reaching net zero or net negative $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions, along with strong reductions in other GHG emissions (see 3.3.2). Future additional warming will depend on future emissions, with total warming dominated by past and future cumulative ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions. {WGI SPM D.1.1, WGI Figure SPM.4; SR1.5 SPM A.2.2}

Reaching net zero ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions is different from reaching net zero GHG emissions. The timing of net zero for a basket of GHGs depends on the emissions metric, such as global warming potential over a 100-year period, chosen to convert non- ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ emissions into ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ -equivalent (high confidence). However, for a given emissions pathway, the physical climate response is independent of the metric chosen (high confidence). {WGI SPM D.1.8; WGIII Box TS.6, WGIII Cross-Chapter Box 2}

Achieving global net zero GHG emissions requires all remaining ${ \mathsf { C O } } _ { 2 }$ and metric-weighted98 non- $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ GHG emissions to be counterbalanced by durably stored $\mathbf { C O } _ { 2 }$ removals (high confidence). Some non- $\mathsf { C O } _ { 2 }$ emissions, such as $\mathsf { C H } _ { 4 }$ and $N _ { 2 } 0$ from agriculture, cannot be fully eliminated using existing and anticipated technical measures. {WGIII SPM C.2.4, WGIII SPM C.11.4, WGIII Cross-Chapter Box 3}

Global net zero $\mathbf { C } \mathbf { 0 } _ { 2 }$ or GHG emissions can be achieved even if some sectors and regions are net emitters, provided that others reach net negative emissions (see Figure 4.1). The potential and cost of achieving net zero or even net negative emissions vary by sector and region. If and when net zero emissions for a given sector or region are reached depends on multiple factors, including the potential to reduce GHG emissions and undertake carbon dioxide removal, the associated costs, and the availability of policy mechanisms to balance emissions and removals between sectors and countries. (high confidence) {WGIII Box TS.6, WGIII Cross-Chapter Box 3}

The adoption and implementation of net zero emission targets by countries and regions also depend on equity and capacity considerations (high confidence). The formulation of net zero pathways by countries will benefit from clarity on scope, plans-of-action, and fairness. Achieving net zero emission targets relies on policies, institutions, and milestones against which to track progress. Least-cost global modelled pathways have been shown to distribute the mitigation effort unevenly, and the incorporation of equity principles could change the country-level timing of net zero (high confidence). The Paris Agreement also recognizes that peaking of emissions will occur later in developing countries than developed countries (Article 4.1). {WGIII Box TS.6, WGIII Cross-Chapter Box 3, WGIII 14.3}

More information on country-level net zero pledges is provided in Section 2.3.1, on the timing of global net zero emissions in Section 3.3.2, and on sectoral aspects of net zero in Section 4.1.